
# abacavir = abc

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ antiretroviral, hiv-1 and hiv-2 nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor

### indications
+ hiv-1 or hiv-2 infection, in combination with other antiretroviral drugs

### presentation
+ 60 mg dispersible tablet
+ 300 mg tablet

### dosage
+ child less than 25 kg: 16 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses, without exceeding 600 mg/day
+ child ≥ 25 kg and adult: 600 mg/day in 2 divided doses

### duration
+ depending on the efficacy and tolerance of abacavir.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions

+ do not administer to patients with severe hepatic impairment or history of severe intolerance to abacavir that led to discontinuation of treatment.
+ may cause:
    - hypersensitivity reactions: skin rash, gastrointestinal disturbances (nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain), cough, dyspnoea, malaise, headache, lethargy, oedema, lymphadenopathy, hypotension, myalgia, arthralgia, renal impairment;
    - lactic acidosis and hepatic disorders.

    in all these cases, stop taking abacavir immediately and permanently.
+ *pregnancy*: avoid, except if there is no therapeutic alternative.

### remarks
+ tablets are not scored. when half a tablet is required, use a cutter or a tablet cutter to cut the tablet into two equal parts.
+ also comes in fixed-dose combination tablets containing abacavir-lamivudine and abacavir-zidovudinelamivudine.
+ also comes in 20 mg/ml oral solution.
+ storage: below 25°c
