
# acetylsalicylic acid = aspirin = asa

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ analgesic, antipyretic, non steroidal anti-inflammatory (nsaid)
+ platelet antiaggregant (at low dose)

### indications
+ mild pain, fever
+ secondary prevention of severe pre-eclampsia

### presentation
+ 300 mg and 500 mg tablets
+ 75 mg enteric coated tablet

### dosage and duration
+   *pain and fever*
    adolescent over 16 years and adult: 300 mg to 1 g every 4 to 6 hours, without exceeding 4 g/day, for 1 to 3 days
+   *prevention of pre-eclampsia*
    75 mg once daily from the 12th to the 32nd week of gestation

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions

+ do not administer to patients with allergy to aspirin and nsaid, peptic ulcer, coagulation disorders, haemorrhage, severe renal, hepatic or cardiac impairment.
+ do not administer to children for pain or fever (use paracetamol).
+ administer with caution to elderly patients or patients with asthma.
+ do not exceed indicated doses, particularly in elderly patients. intoxications are severe, possibly fatal.
+ may cause:
    - allergic reactions, epigastric pain, peptic ulcer, haemorrhage;
    - dizziness, tinnitus (early signs of overdose);
    - reye’s syndrome in children (encephalopathy and severe hepatic disorders).
for all cases above, stop aspirin.
+ do not combine with methotrexate, anticoagulants and nsaid.
+ monitor combination with insulin (increased hypoglycaemia) and corticosteroids.
+ *pregnancy*:
    - pain and fever: avoid. contra-indicated from the beginning of the 6th month. use paracetamol.
    - prevention of pre-eclampsia: do not exceed 75 mg/day.
+ *breast-feeding*: avoid. use paracetamol.

### remarks
+ take during meals, preferably with a lot of water.
+ do not crush enteric coated tablets.
+ aspirin may be administered in secondary prevention of atherothrombosis, at a dose of 75 to 300 mg daily.
+ storage: below 25°c
+ do not use if tablets have a strong smell of vinegar. a slight vinegar smell is always present.
