
# aciclovir

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ antiviral active against herpes simplex virus and varicella zoster virus

### indications
+ treatment of recurrent or extensive oral and oesophageal herpes in immunocompromised patients
+ treatment of herpetic kerato-uveitis
+ treatment of genital herpes
+ secondary prophylaxis of herpes in patients with frequent and/or severe recurrences
+ treatment of severe forms of zoster: necrotic or extensive forms, facial or ophthalmic zoster

### presentation
+ 200 mg and 800 mg tablets
also comes in 40 mg/ml oral suspension.

### dosage and duration
+ *treatment of recurrent or extensive oral and oesophageal herpes in immunocompromised patients, treatment of herpetic kerato-uveitis*

    child under 2 years: 200 mg 5 times per day for 7 days
    child over 2 years and adult: 400 mg 5 times per day for 7 days
+ *treatment of genital herpes*

    child over 2 years and adult: 400 mg 3 times per day for 7 days; in immunocompromised patients, continue treatment until clinical resolution
+ *secondary prophylaxis of herpes in patients with frequent and/or severe recurrences*

    child under 2 years: 200 mg 2 times per day
    child over 2 years and adult: 400 mg 2 times per day
+ treatment of severe forms of zoster

    adult: 800 mg 5 times per day for 7 days

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with hypersensitivity to aciclovir.
+ may cause: headache, skin rash, allergic reactions, gastrointestinal disturbances, raised transaminases, neurologic disorders in patients with renal impairment and elderly patients; rarely, haematological disorders.
+ reduce dosage in patients with renal impairment.
+ drink a lot of liquid during treatment.
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ for the treatment of herpes simplex, aciclovir should be started as soon as possible (within 96 hours) after the appearance of lesions to reduce severity and duration of infection.
+ for the treatment of herpes zoster, aciclovir should be start preferably within 72 hours after the appearance of lesions. aciclovir administration does not reduce the likelihood of developing zosterassociated pain but reduces the overall duration of this pain.
+ storage: below 25°c
