# amitriptyline

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision
### therapeutic action

+ tricyclic antidepressant with anxiolytic and sedative properties

### indications
+ neuropathic pain, often in combination with carbamazepine
+ major depression, especially when a sedative effect is required

### presentation
+ 25 mg tablet

### dosage
+ adult:
    - neuropathic pain: initial dose of 25 mg once daily at bedtime for one week. increase to 50 mg once daily the following week, then 75 mg once daily at bedtime as of the third week (max. 150 mg/day).
    - depression: the usual dose is 75 to 150 mg once daily (depending on efficacy and tolerance) at bedtime. the dose is also increased progressively but more rapidly, over 8 to 10 days.
+ reduce the dose by half in elderly patients and in patients with hepatic or renal impairment.

### duration
+ neuropathic pain: several months (3 to 6) after pain relief is obtained, then attempt to stop treatment.
+ depression: minimum 6 months. the treatment should be discontinued gradually (dose tapered over 4 weeks). if signs of relapse occur, increase the dose.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with recent myocardial infarction, arrhythmia, closed-angle glaucoma, prostate disorders.
+ administer with caution and carefully monitor use in patients > 60 years and in patients with epilepsy, chronic constipation, renal or hepatic impairment, history of bipolar disorders.
+ may cause:
    - drowsiness (caution when driving/operating machinery), orthostatic hypotension, sexual dysfunction;
    - anticholinergic effects: dry mouth, blurred vision, constipation, tachycardia, disorders of micturition. these adverse effects are transitory or disappear with dose reduction. treatment should be discontinued in the event of severe reactions (mental confusion, urinary retention, cardiac rhythm disorders);
    - psychic disorders: exacerbation of anxiety, possibility of a suicide attempt at the beginning of therapy, manic episode during treatment.
+ do not combine with another antidepressant.
+ monitor combination with cns depressants (opioid analgesics, sedatives, h1 antihistamines, etc.), drugs known to have anticholinergic effects (atropine, chlorpromazine, promethazine, etc.), drugs which lower the seizure threshold (antispychotics, mefloquine, tramadol, etc.), lithium and other serotonergics.
+ avoid alcohol during treatment.
+ *pregnancy*: re-evaluate whether the treatment is still necessary; if it is continued, decrease the dose at the end of pregnancy to avoid gastrointestinal and neurological adverse effects in the newborn infant.
+ *breast-feeding*: monitor the child for excessive somnolence.

### remarks
+ sedative effect occurs following initial doses, analgesic effect is delayed for 7 to 10 days. for depression, it is necessary to wait 3 weeks before assessing therapeutic efficacy. this must be explained to the patient.
+ storage: below 25°c