# amoxicillin

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ penicillin antibacterial

### indications

½ tab x 3
1 tab x 3
2 tab x 3
4 tab x 3

500 mg tablet
-
-
1 tab x 3
2 tab x 3
+ acute otitis media, streptococcal tonsillitis, sinusitis, bronchitis, pneumonia
+ infection due to helicobacter pylori (in combination with omeprazole and metronidazole or tinidazole), leptospirosis, no severe cutaneous anthrax
+ typhoid fever (if ciprofloxacin is contra-indicated and if the strain is susceptible)
+ completion treatment following parenteral therapy with penicillins or cephalosporins

### presentation
+ 250 mg and 500 mg tablets or capsules
+ 250 mg dispersible scored tablet, for paediatric use
+ 125 mg/5 ml powder for oral suspension, to be reconstituted with filtered water

### dosage
+ usual dosage (e.g. leptospirosis, tonsillitis, infection due to h. pylori)
child: 50 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses
adult: 2 g/day in 2 divided doses

| age | weight | 125 mg/5 ml susp. | 250 mg tablet |
|-----|--------|-------------------|---------------|
< 3 months | < 6 kg
3 to < 24 months | 6 to < 12 kg
2 to < 8 years | 12 to < 25 kg
≥ 8 years and adult | ≥ 25 kg

age | weight | 125 mg/5 ml susp. | 250 mg tablet
< 3 months | < 6 kg
3 to < 24 months | 6 to < 12 kg
2 to < 8 years | 12 to < 25 kg
≥ 8 years and adult | ≥ 25 kg








1 tsp x 2
2 tsp x 2
4 tsp x 2
-



age
< 3 months
3 to < 24 months
2 to < 8 years
≥ 8 years and adult

weight
< 6 kg
6 to < 12 kg
12 to < 25 kg
≥ 25 kg

125 mg/5 ml susp.
1 tsp x 3
2 tsp x 3
4 tsp x 3
-

250 mg tablet

½ tab x 2
1 tab x 2
2 tab x 2
4 tab x 2

500 mg tablet
-
-
1 tab x 2
2 tab x 2

+ severe infections (e.g. typhoid) or suspicion of resistant pneumococci (e.g. pneumonia, otitis)

    child: 80 to 100 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses (max. 3 g)
    adult: 3 g/day in 3 divided doses

½ tab x 3
1 tab x 3
2 tab x 3
4 tab x 3

500 mg tablet
-
-
1 tab x 3
2 tab x 3

### duration
+ otitis media: 5 days; tonsillitis: 6 days; leptospirosis: 7 days; pneumonia, sinusitis, cutaneous anthrax: 7 to 10 days; h. pylori infection: 10 to 14 days; typhoid fever: 14 days

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to penicillin-allergic patients or patients with mononucleosis.
+ administer with caution to patients allergic to cephalosporins (cross-sensitivity may occur).
+ may cause: gastrointestinal disturbances, allergic reactions, sometimes severe. in the event of allergic reaction, stop treatment immediately.
+ reduce dosage in patients with severe renal impairment.
+ do not combine with methotrexate.
+ *pregnancy and breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ storage: below 25°c
+ for the oral suspension (powder or reconstituted suspension): follow manufacturer’s instructions.