# amoxicillin/clavulanic acid = co-amoxiclav

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ combination of two antibacterials. the addition of clavulanic acid to amoxicillin extends its spectrum of activity to cover beta-lactamase producing gram-positive and gram-negative organisms, including some gram-negative anaerobes.

### indications
+ animal bites, if antibiotic therapy or antibiotic prophylaxis is clearly indicated
+ second line treatment of acute otitis media and acute bacterial sinusitis, when amoxicillin alone given at high dose failed
+ acute uncomplicated cystitis (no systemic signs) in girls > 2 years
+ postpartum upper genital tract infection
+ severe pneumonia: parenteral to oral switch therapy in patients treated with ceftriaxone + cloxacillin

### presentation
+ the ratio of amoxicillin and clavulanic acid varies according to the manufacturer:
ratio 8:1

+ 500 mg amoxicillin/62.5 mg clavulanic acid tablet
+ 500 mg amoxicillin/62.5 mg clavulanic acid/5 ml powder for oral suspension

ratio 7:1

+ 875 mg amoxicillin/125 mg clavulanic acid tablet
+ 400 mg amoxicillin/57 mg clavulanic acid/5 ml, powder for oral suspension

ratio 4:1

+ 500 mg amoxicillin/125 mg clavulanic acid tablet
+ 125 mg amoxicillin/31.25 mg clavulanic acid/5 ml, powder for oral suspension

also comes in formultions with a ratio amoxicillin/clavulanic acid of 16:1, 14:1, 6:1, 2:1.

dosage (expressed in amoxicillin)

+ animal bites; second line treatment of acute otitis media and acute sinusitis
    - child < 40 kg: 45 to 50 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses (if using ratio 8:1 or 7:1) or in 3 divided doses (if using ratio 4:1)
note: the dose of clavulanic acid should not exceed 12.5 mg/kg/day or 375 mg/day.
    - child ≥ 40 kg and adult: 1500 to 2000 mg/day depending on the formulation available:
ratio 8:1: 2000 mg/day = 2 tablets of 500/62.5 mg 2 times per day
ratio 7:1: 1750 mg/day = 1 tablet of 875/125 mg 2 times per day
ratio 4:1: 1500 mg/day = 1 tablet of 500/125 mg 3 times per day
note: the dose of clavulanic acid should not exceed 375 mg/day.
+ acute uncomplicated cystitis in girls > 2 years
25 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses (if using ratio 8:1 or 7:1 or 4:1)
note: the dose of clavulanic acid should not exceed 12.5 mg/kg/day or 375 mg/day.
+ postpartum upper genital tract infection; parenteral to oral switch therapy in severe pneumonia use formulations with a ratio 8:1 or 7:1:
    - child < 40 kg: 80 to 100 mg/kg/day in 2 or 3 divided doses
note: the dose of clavulanic acid should not exceed 12.5 mg/kg/day or 375 mg/day.
    - child ≥ 40 kg and adult: 2500 to 3000 mg/day in 3 divided doses. depending on the formulation available:
ratio 8:1: 3000 mg/day = 2 tablets of 500/62.5 mg 3 times per day
ratio 7:1: 2625 mg/day = 1 tablet of 875/125 mg 3 times per day
note: the dose of clavulanic acid should not exceed 375 mg/day.


### duration
+ animal bites: 5 to 7 days; otitis media: 5 days; sinusitis: 7 to 10 days; cystitis: 3 days; upper genital tract infection: 7 days; parenteral to oral switch therapy in severe pneunonia: to complete a total of 10 to 14 days of treatment.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to penicillin-allergic patients and patients with history of hepatic disorders during a previous treatment with co-amoxiclav.
+ administer with caution to patients allergic to cephalosporins (cross-sensitivity may occur).
+ administer with caution to patients with hepatic impairment; reduce dosage and give every 12 to 24 hours in patients with severe renal impairment.
+ may cause: gastrointestinal disturbances (mainly diarrhoea); allergic reactions sometimes severe (stop treatment immediately); jaundice and cholestatic hepatitis in the event of prolonged treatment (> 10 to 15 days).
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ high doses of co-amoxiclav (80-100 mg/kg/day or 2.5-3 g/day) cannot be administered when using formulations of amoxicillin/clavulanic acid in a ratio of 4:1 (the content in clavulanic acid is too high). the maximum dose (expressed in amoxicillin) that can be given with these formulations is 50 mg/kg/day, without exceeding 1500 mg/day.
+ take with meals.
+ storage: below 25°c
powder for oral suspension: between 15°c and 25°c
once reconstituted, the oral suspension must be kept refrigerated (between 2°c and 8°c) and may be used for up to 7 days.