# artemether/lumefantrine = coartemether = al

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ antimalarial

### indications
+ treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria
+ completion treatment following parenteral therapy for severe falciparum malaria

### presentation
+ 20 mg artemether/120 mg lumefantrine co-formulated tablet, in blister packs, for a complete treatment for one individual
    - blister packs of 6, 12, 18 or 24 tablets, corresponding to 4 different categories of weight
    - blister packs of 6 and 12 tablets contain dispersible tablets.
+ 80 mg artemether/480 mg lumefantrine co-formulated tablet, in blister pack of 6 tablets, for a complete treatment for one individual

### dosage and duration
+ the treatment is administered twice daily for 3 days. on d1, the first dose is given at 0 hour and the second dose at 8-12 hours. subsequent doses on d2 and d3 are given twice daily (morning and evening).

weight

d1

20/120 mg tablet
d2

d3

d1

2 tab x 2

-

5 to < 15 kg

1 tab x 2

1 tab x 2

1 tab x 2

25 to < 35 kg

3 tab x 2

3 tab x 2

3 tab x 2

15 to < 25 kg
≥ 35 kg

2 tab x 2
4 tab x 2

2 tab x 2
4 tab x 2

4 tab x 2

-
-

1 tab x 2

80/480 mg tablet
d2

d3

-

-

-
-

1 tab x 2

-
-

1 tab x 2

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ may cause: nausea, headache, dizziness and gastrointestinal disturbances.
+ do not combine with azole antifungals (fluconazole, itraconazole, miconazole, etc.), tricyclic antidepressants, neuroleptics (chlorpromazine, haloperidol, etc.), macrolides, quinolones, other antimalarials, beta- blockers.
+ if the patient vomits within one hour of administration: repeat the full dose.
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ take with meals.
+ coartemether should not be used for malaria prophylaxis.
+ lumefantrine is also called benflumetol.
+ storage: below 25°c
+ leave tablets in blisters until use. once a tablet is removed from its blister, it must be administered immediately.