# artesunate + sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine = as + sp

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ antimalarial

### indications
+ treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria
+ completion treatment following parenteral therapy for severe falciparum malaria

### presentation
+ artesunate (as) tablets and sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine (sp) tablets, in blister packs, for a complete treatment for one individual
+ there are 4 different blister packs:
    - child < 25 kg:
    - 
blister pack with 3 tab as 50 mg and 1 tab sp 500/25 mg
    - child 25 to < 50 kg:
blister pack with 6 tab as 50 mg and 2 tab sp 500/25 mg
    - child ≥ 50 kg and adult: blister pack with 12 tab as 50 mg and 3 tab sp 500/25 mg
or blister pack with 6 tab as 100 mg and 3 tab sp 500/25 mg

weight

5 to < 10 kg

10 to < 25 kg
25 to < 50 kg
≥ 50 kg and adult

blister pack

3 tab as50 + 1 tab sp
6 tab as50 + 2 tab sp

12 tab as50 + 3 tab sp
6 tab as100 + 3 tab sp

d1

d3

½ tab as + ½ tab sp

½ tab as

½ tab as

2 tab as + 2 tab sp

2 tab as

2 tab as

1 tab as + 1 tab sp
4 tab as + 3 tab sp
2 tab as + 3 tab sp

d2

1 tab as
4 tab as
2 tab as

1 tab as
4 tab as
2 tab as

### dosage and duration
+ artesunate is administered once daily for 3 days. sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine is administered as a single dose on d1, with the first dose of artesunate.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with allergy to sulfonamides.
+ may cause: see artesunate and sulfadoxine/pyrimethamine.
+ do not use in combination with cotrimoxazole.
+ do not give folic acid on the same day sp is administered, or within 15 days thereafter.
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ storage: below 25°c
+ leave tablets in blisters until use. once a tablet is removed from its blister, it must be administered immediately.
+ if half tablets are used, remaining 1/2 tablets may be given to another patient if administered within 24 hours.