# azithromycin

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ macrolide antibacterial

### indications
+ trachoma, conjunctivitis due to chlamydia trachomatis
+ cervicitis and urethritis due to chlamydia trachomatis (in combination with a treatment for gonorrhoea), donovanosis, chancroid, early syphilis
+ cholera (if the strain is susceptible), yaws
+ pertussis, pneumonia due to mycoplasma pneumoniae and chlamydophila pneumoniae
+ streptococcal tonsillitis, acute otitis media, in penicillin-allergic patients only

### presentation
+ 250 mg and 500 mg capsules or tablets
+ 200 mg/5 ml powder for oral suspension, to be reconstituted with filtered water

### dosage and duration
+ trachoma, cholera, cervicitis and urethritis due to c. trachomatis, chancroid, early syphilis
child: 20 mg/kg as a single dose (max. 1 g)
adult: 1 g as a single dose (2 g as a single dose in early syphilis)
+ yaws
child and adult: 30 mg/kg as a single dose (max. 2 g)
+ conjunctivitis due to c. trachomatis
child: 20 mg/kg once daily for 3 days (max. 1 g/day)
adult: 1 g once daily for 3 days
+ donovanosis (granuloma inguinale)
adult: 1 g on d1 then 500 mg/day until healing of lesions
+ pertussis, pneumonia due to m. pneumoniae and c. pneumoniae
child: 10 mg/kg once daily for 5 days (max. 500 mg/day)
adult: 500 mg on d1 then 250 mg from d2 to d5
+ streptococcal tonsillitis, only in penicillin-allergic patients
child: 20 mg/kg once daily for 3 days (max. 500 mg/day)
adult: 500 mg once daily for 3 days
+ acute otitis media, only in penicillin-allergic patients
child: 10 mg/kg once daily for 3 days (max. 500 mg/day)

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with allergy to azithromycin or another macrolide, and to patients with severe hepatic impairment.
+ may cause: gastrointestinal disturbances, heart rhythm disorders (qt prolongation), allergic reactions sometimes severe. in the event of allergic reaction, stop treatment immediately.
+ do not administer simultaneously with antacids (aluminium or magnesium hydroxide, etc.). administer 2 hours apart.
+ avoid combination with drugs that prolong the qt interval (amiodarone, chloroquine, co-artemether, fluconazole, haloperidol, mefloquine, moxifloxacin, ondansetron, pentamidine, quinine, etc.).
+ administer with caution and monitor use in patients taking digoxin (increased digoxin plasma levels).
+ pregnancy and *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ also comes in 250 mg or 500 mg capsules, to be taken one hour before or 2 hours after a meal.
+ storage: below 25°c
+ for the oral suspension (powder or reconstituted suspension): follow manufacturer’s instructions.