# beclometasone aerosol

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ anti-inflammatory drug (corticosteroid)

### indications
+ long term treatment of persistent asthma

### presentation and route of administration
+ pressurized inhalation solution of beclomatesone dipropionate, 50 micrograms and 100 micrograms/inhalation

### dosage and administration
the dosage varies from one person to another. the initial dose depends on the severity of symptoms. it may be increased or reduced over time. always try to administer the lowest effective dose. for information:
+ mild to moderate persistent asthma  
    child: 100 to 400 micrograms/day in 2 or 4 divided doses
    adult: 500 to 1000 micrograms/day in 2 or 4 divided doses
+ severe persistent asthma  
    child: up to 800 micrograms/day in 2 or 4 divided doses
    adult: up to 1500 micrograms/day in 2 or 4 divided doses

shake the inhaler. breathe out as completely as possible. place the lips tightly around the mouthpiece.

inhale deeply while activating the inhaler. hold breath 10 seconds before exhaling. verify that the inhalation technique is correct.

co-ordination between the hand and inhalation is very difficult in certain patients (children under 6 years, elderly patients, etc.). use a spacer to facilitate administration and improve the efficacy of treatment.

### duration
+ according to clinical response

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with untreated active tuberculosis.
+ may cause: throat irritation, hoarseness at the beginning of treatment, oro-pharyngeal candidiasis.
+ in the event of cough and/or bronchospasm following inhalation of beclometasone: administer salbutamol if necessary, stop inhalation of beclometasone and replace with an oral corticoid.
+ in the event of bronchial infection, administer appropriate antibiotic treatment in order to optimise the diffusion of beclometasone in the respiratory tract.
+ if the maximum dosage becomes insufficient, re-evaluate the severity of asthma and combine with a short oral anti-inflammatory treatment.
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ beclometasone is not a bronchodilator. for asthma attack, use inhaled salbutamol.
+ relief of symptoms may require several days or weeks of continuous therapy.
+ clean the mouthpiece before and after each use.
+ do not pierce or incinerate used aerosol containers. empty all residual gas, then bury.
+ storage: below 25°c