# biperiden

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision
+ 
### therapeutic action

+ anticholinergic antiparkinson drug

### indications
+ extrapyramidal syndrome induced by antipsychotics

### presentation- 2 mg tablet

### dosage
+ adult: initial dose of 2 mg/day in 2 divided doses, increased gradually if necessary up to 4 to 6 mg/day in 2 to 3 divided doses (max. 8 mg/day)
+ administer in the lowest effective dose in elderly patients.

### duration
+ as long as the antipsychotic treatment lasts.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with closed-angle glaucoma, decompensated heart disease, prostate disorders, gastrointestinal obstruction or atony.
+ administer with caution and carefully monitor use in patients > 60 years (risk of mental confusion, hallucinations).
+ may cause: anticholinergic effects (dry mouth, blurred vision, urinary retention, constipation, tachycardia), drowsiness (inform the patient that it may affect the capacity to drive or operate machinery). in these events, reduce the dose.
+ avoid or monitor combination with other drugs known to have anticholinergic effects (amitriptyline, atropine, clomipramine, promethazine, etc.).
+ *pregnancy*: re-evaluate whether the antipsychotic treatment is still necessary; if treatment is continued, administer biperiden in the lowest effective dose and observe the newborn infant if the mother was under treatment in the 3rd trimester (risk of anticholinergic effect, e.g. tremors, abdominal distension).
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication. administer in the lowest effective dose and observe the child (risk of anticholinergic effects, e.g. tachycardia, constipation, thickening of bronchial secretions).

### remarks
+ biperiden is also used in parkinson’s disease:
    - as monotherapy early in the course of the disease;
    - in combination with levodopa in the most advanced stages.
+ also comes in 4 mg extended-release tablet, administered once daily in the morning.
+ storage: below 25°c