# bisacodyl

### therapeutic action
+ stimulant laxative

### indications
+ prevention of constipation in patients taking opioid analgesics (codeine, morphine, etc.)
+ short-term, symptomatic treatment of constipation

### presentation
+ 5 mg enteric-coated tablet

### dosage
+ child over 3 years: 5 to 10 mg once daily
+ adult: 10 to 15 mg once daily

### duration
+ prevention of constipation in patients taking opioids: start bisacodyl when analgesic treatment continues more than 48 hours. tablets must be taken daily, at night (bisacodyl is effective 6 to 12 hours after administration), until the end of the opioid treatment. regular follow up (frequency/consistency of stools) is essential in order to adjust dosage correctly.
+ treatment of constipation: until the patient passes stools, maximum 7 days.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, intestinal obstruction, undiagnosed abdominal pain and dehydration.
+ may cause: diarrhoea, abdominal cramps, hypokalaemia.
+ in the event of diarrhoea: exclude a faecal impaction or intestinal obstruction, stop treatment for 24 hours and then start again with a half dose.
+ in the event of abdominal cramps: reduce or divide the daily dose. stop treatment if pain continues.
+ do not combine with drugs that induce torsades de pointe (halofantrine, erythromycin iv, pentamidine, etc.).
+ closely monitor patients taking drugs that induce hypokalaemia (furosemide, amphotericin b, corticosteroids, etc.) or cardiac glycosides.
+ *pregnancy and breast-feeding*: avoid; for routine prevention of constipation due to opioids, use lactulose.

### remarks
+ to prevent constipation in patients taking opioids, use lactulose if the patient’s stools are solid; use bisacodyl if the patient’s stools are soft.
+ in children from 6 months to 3 years, do not use the oral route. use only 5 mg paediatric suppositories (one suppository/day).
+ swallow tablets whole; do not crush or chew.
+ bisacodyl is equivalent to senna, the representative example of laxative stimulants in the who list of essential medicines.
+ the treatment must be accompanied by dietary measures (plenty of fluids and fibre).
+ storage: below 25°c