# bisoprolol

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ cardioselective beta-blocker

### indications
+ hypertension, treatment of chronic stable angina pectoris
+ chronic stable heart failure in combination with a converting enzyme inhibitor (enalapril) and a diuretic (furosemide)

### presentation
+ 2.5 mg breakable tablet and 5 mg tablet

### dosage
+ hypertension, angina pectoris
adult: 5 to 10 mg once daily, preferably in the morning (max. 20 mg/day)
+ heart failure
adult: start with 1.25 mg/day and increase according to the table below, as long as the drug is well tolerated (cardiac frequency, blood pressure, signs of worsening heart failure).

weeks

daily dose

tablet(s)

week 1

1.25 mg once daily

2.5 mg tab: ½ tab per day

week 3

3.75 mg once daily

2.5 mg tab: 1½ tab per day

week 2
week 4 to 8

week 9 to 12

from week 13

### duration
2.5 mg once daily
5 mg once daily

7.5 mg once daily
10 mg once daily
(max. 10 mg/day)

2.5 mg tab: 1 tab per day
5 mg tab: 1 tab per day

2.5 mg tab:1 tab per day + 5 mg tab: 1 tab per day
5 mg tab: 2 tab per day

+ according to clinical response. do not stop treatment abruptly, decrease doses gradually.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with asthma, chronic obstructive bronchopneumonia, acute heart failure, severe hypotension, bradycardia < 50/minute, atrio-ventricular heart blocks, raynaud's syndrome.
+ may cause:
    - bradycardia, hypotension, worsening of heart failure (reduce dose);
    - bronchospasm in patients with an obstructive respiratory disease;
    - hypoglycaemia, gastrointestinal disturbances, headache, fatigue, muscle weakness.
+ administer with caution to patients with diabetes (risk of hypoglycaemia).
+ reduce dosage in patients with renal or hepatic impairment (max. 10 mg/day).
+ in the event of anaphylactic shock, risk of resistance to epinephrine.
+ avoid or monitor combination with:
    - mefloquine, digoxin, amiodarone, diltiazem, verapamil (risk of bradycardia);
    - tricyclic antidepressants, antipsychotics, anti-hypertensive drugs (risk of hypotension).
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication. for the management of hypertension in pregnancy, use labetalol.
+ *breast-feeding*: avoid

### remarks
+ also comes in 1.25 mg tablets.
+ storage: below 25°c