# cefalexin

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ first-generation cephalosporin antibacterial

### indications
+ skin infections due to staphylococci and/or streptococci: impetigo, furuncle, erysipelas and superficial cellulitis

### presentation
+ 250 mg capsule
+ 125 mg/5 ml powder for oral suspension, to be reconstituted with filtered water

### dosage
+ neonate under 7 days: 50 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses
+ neonate 7 to 28 days: 75 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses  
    the exact dose should be calculated according to the newborn’s weight.
+ child 1 month to 12 years: 25 to 50 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses
+ child over 12 years and adult: 2 g/day in 2 divided doses

age

1 to < 5 months

5 months to < 3 years
3 to < 6 years

6 to < 12 years

≥ 12 years and adult

weight

125 mg/5 ml oral susp.

250 mg capsule

7 to < 15 kg

1½ tsp x 2

-

20 to < 40 kg

-

4 to < 7 kg

15 to < 20 kg

1 tsp x 2
2 tsp x 2

≥ 40 kg

-

-
-

2 cap x 2
4 cap x 2

### duration
+ impetigo, furuncle: 7 days; erysipelas, cellulitis: 7 to 10 days

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions

+ do not administer to patients with allergy to cephalosporin.
+ administer with caution to patients with allergy to penicillin (cross-sensitivity may occur) and severe renal impairment (reduce the dose).
+ may cause: gastrointestinal disturbances (particularly diarrhoea), allergic reactions (skin eruption, fever, pruritus).
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ take preferably between meals.
+ also comes in 250 mg/5 ml powder for oral suspension.
+ storage: below 25°c
+ for the oral suspension (powder or reconstituted suspension): follow manufacturer’s instructions.