# chloramphenicol

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision
+ the use of chloramphenicol should be restricted to severe infections when other less toxic antibacterials are not effective or contra-indicated.

### therapeutic action
+ phenicol antibacterial

### indications
+ alternative to first-line treatments of bubonic plague
+ alternative to first-line treatments of typhoid fever
+ completion treatment following parenteral therapy with chloramphenicol

### presentation
+ 250 mg capsule

### dosage
+ child from 1 year to less than 13 years: 50 mg/kg/day in 3 to 4 divided doses; 100 mg/kg/day in severe infection (max. 3 g/day)
+ child ≥ 13 years and adult: 3 to 4 g/day in 3 to 4 divided doses
+ 
age

1 to < 4 years
4 to < 9 years
9 to < 13 years
≥ 13 years and adult

### duration
weight
10 to < 17 kg
17 to < 30 kg
30 to < 45 kg
≥ 45 kg

250 mg capsule
1 cap x 3
2 cap x 3
3 cap x 3
4 cap x 3

+ plague: 10 days; typhoid fever: 10 to 14 days

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to children under 1 year.
+ do not administer to patients with:
    - history of allergic reaction or bone marrow depression during a previous treatment with chloramphenicol;
    - g6pd deficiency.
+ may cause:
    - dose-related haematological toxicity (bone marrow depression, anaemia, leucopenia, thrombocytopenia),
allergic reactions. in these events, stop treatment immediately;
    - gastrointestinal disturbances, peripheral and optic neuropathies.
+ reduce dosage in patients with hepatic or renal impairment.
+ avoid or monitor combination with potentially haematotoxic drugs (carbamazepine, cotrimoxazole, flucytocine, pyrimethamine, zidovudine, etc.).
+ *pregnancy*: contra-indicated, except if vital, if there is no therapeutic alternative. if used during the 3rd trimester, risk of grey syndrome in the newborn infant (vomiting, hypothermia, blue-grey skin colour and cardiovascular depression).
+ *breast-feeding*: contra-indicated

### remarks
+ oral treatment is more effective than parenteral treatment: blood and tissue oncentrations are higher when chloramphenicol is given orally.
+ capsules can be opened and their content mixed into a spoon with food.
+ also comes in 150 mg/5 ml powder for oral suspension.
+ storage: below 25°c