# chloroquine sulfate or phosphate

+ given that resistance of p. falciparum to chloroquine is widespread, this drug must not be used for the treatment of falciparum malaria in africa, south america, asia and oceania.

### therapeutic action
+ antimalarial

### indications
+ treatment of malaria due to p. vivax, p. ovale and p. malariae
+ treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria, only in areas where p. falciparum is still sensitive to
chloroquine (central america, haiti and dominican republic)
+ prophylaxis of falciparum malaria for non-immune individuals, only in areas where resistance to
chloroquine is moderate and always in combination with proguanil

### presentation
+ 100 mg and 155 mg chloroquine base tablets
+ 50 mg chloroquine base/5 ml syrup

the dose written on the labels is sometimes in chloroquine salt and sometimes in chloroquine base which
leads to frequent confusion. the who recommends prescriptions and labels in chloroquine base.
100 mg base = approx. 130 mg sulfate = approx. 160 mg phosphate or diphosphate
155 mg base = approx. 200 mg sulfate = approx. 250 mg phosphate or diphosphate

### dosage and duration
+ treatment of malaria
child and adult: 25 mg/kg total dose for 3 days of treatment
day 1 and day 2: 10 mg base/kg once daily
day 3:
5 mg base/kg

+ prophylaxis of falciparum malaria in areas where resistance to chloroquine is moderate
child: 1.7 mg chloroquine base/kg once daily (always combined with proguanil)
adult: 100 mg chloroquine base once daily (always combined with proguanil)
travellers should start prophylaxis 24 hours before departure, continue throughout the stay and for at
least 4 weeks after return.
in areas where resistance to chloroquine is high, chloroquine must be replaced by another effective
antimalarial suitable for prophylactic use.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with retinopathy.
+ may cause: gastrointestinal disturbances, headache, transitory pruritus (lasting 72 hours), allergic reactions (urticaria, angioedema), visual disturbances.
+ if the patient vomits within one hour after administration:
    - during the first 30 minutes: repeat the full dose;
    - after 30 minutes: give half the dose.

+ there is a narrow margin between the therapeutic and toxic dose. doses of 20 mg base/kg in children and 2 g base in adults are considered toxic.
+ do not combine with: coartemether, quinine, mefloquine, halofantrine.
+ do not administer simultaneously with antacids (aluminium hydroxide, etc.): administer 2 hours apart.
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ chloroquine alone (without proguanil) is used as a prophylactic drug in certain areas where only p. vivax  is present.
+ resistance of p. vivax to chloroquine exists in indonesia and oceania.
+ storage: below 25°c