# chlorphenamine = chlorpheniramine

### therapeutic action
+ sedating antihistamine

### indications
+ symptomatic treatment of minor allergic reactions (contact dermatitis, seasonal allergy, allergy to drugs,
food, etc.)

### presentation
+ 4 mg tablet
also comes in 2 mg/5 ml oral solution.

### dosage
+ child from 1 to 2 years: 1 mg 2 times daily
+ child from 2 to 6 years: 1 mg 4 to 6 times daily (max. 6 mg/day)
+ child from 6 to 12 years: 2 mg 4 to 6 times daily (max. 12 mg/day)
+ child over 12 years and adult: 4 mg 4 to 6 times daily (max. 24 mg/day)

< 1 year

age

weight
< 10 kg

do not administer

13 to < 21 kg

¼ tab x 4

1 to < 2 years

10 to < 13 kg

6 to < 12 years

21 to < 37 kg

2 to < 6 years

≥ 12 years and adult

### duration
4 mg tablet

≥ 37 kg

¼ tab x 2

½ tab x 4
1 tab x 4

+ according to clinical response; as short as possible.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ administer with caution and monitor use in patients with prostate disorders or closed-angle glaucoma,
patients > 60 years and children (risk of agitation, excitability).
+ may cause: drowsiness (caution when driving/operating machinery), anticholinergic effects (dry mouth,
blurred vision, constipation, tachycardia, disorders of micturition), headache, tremor, allergic reactions.
+ monitor combination with cns depressants (opioid analgesics, antipsychotics, sedatives, antidepressants,
etc.).
+ avoid alcohol during treatment.
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication; no prolonged treatment
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication; monitor the child for excessive somnolence.

### remarks
+ chlorphenamine is less sedating than promethazine.
+ dexchlorpheniramine has the same # indications
    - child 1 to 2 years: 0.25 mg 2 to 3 times daily
    - child 2 to 6 years: 0.5 mg 2 to 3 times daily
    - child 6 to 12 years: 1 mg 3 to 4 times daily
    - child over 12 years and adult: 2 mg 3 to 4 times daily
+ storage: below 25°c
