# chlorpromazine

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision
### therapeutic action

+ sedative antipsychotic (neuroleptic)

### indications
+ acute or chronic psychosis
+ severe anxiety not controlled by benzodiazepines

### presentation
+ 25 mg tablet
also comes in 100 mg tablets.

### dosage
+ acute or chronic psychosis
adult: initial dose of 75 mg/day in 3 divided doses; if necessary, the dose may be gradually increased up to 300 mg/day in 3 divided doses (max. 600 mg/day). once the patient is stable, the maintenance dose is administered once daily in the evening.
+ severe anxiety not controlled by benzodiazepines
adult: 75 to 150 mg/day in 3 divided doses
+ whatever the indication, reduce the dose by half in elderly patients.
+ use the lowest effective dose, especially in the event of prolonged treatment.

### duration
+ acute psychosis: minimum 3 months; chronic psychosis: minimum one year. the treatment should be
discontinued gradually (over 4 weeks). if signs of relapse occur, increase the dose.
+ severe anxiety: maximum 4 weeks.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with closed-angle glaucoma, prostate disorders; to elderly patients with dementia (e.g. alzheimer's disease).
+ administer with caution and carefully monitor use in patients > 60 years; patients with epilepsy, chronic constipation, renal or hepatic impairment, parkinson's disease, myasthenia gravis.
+ may cause:
    - drowsiness (caution when driving/operating machinery), orthostatic hypotension, sexual dysfunction;
    - anticholinergic effects (dry mouth, blurred vision, urinary retention, constipation, tachycardia);
    - extrapyramidal syndrome, early or tardive dyskinesia, photosensitivity (patients must protect themselves from sunlight), jaundice; neuroleptic malignant syndrome (unexplained hyperthermia with neuromuscular disorders), rare but requiring immediate treatment discontinuation.
+ in the event of extrapyramidal symptoms, combine with biperiden.
+ avoid or monitor combination with: drugs which lower the seizure threshold (mefloquine, chloroquine, tramadol, tricyclic or ssri antidepressants); cns depressants (opioid analgesics, sedatives, h1 antihistamines, etc.); drugs known to have anticholinergic effects (amitriptyline, atropine, clomipramine, promethazine, etc.); antidiabetics, lithium.
+ avoid alcohol during treatment.
+ chlorpromazine is irritating to the skin/mucous membranes: do not crush tablets.
+ *pregnancy*: re-evaluate whether the treatment is still necessary; if it is continued, monitor the newborn infant for extrapyramidal and/or anticholinergic effects (tremor, abdominal distension, hyperexcitability, etc.) if the mother was under high dose treatment in the 3rd trimester.
+ *breast-feeding*: avoid

### remarks
+ in the event of agitation or aggressiveness in patients under other antipsychotic treatment (e.g. risperidone or haloperidol), chlorpromazine may be administered at the dose of 75 to 150 mg/day in 3 divided doses for a few days.
+ chlorpromazine produces less extrapyramidal symptoms than haloperidol but orthostatic hypotension and anticholinergic effects are more frequent.
+ storage: below 25°c