# cimetidine

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision
### therapeutic action

+ antiulcer agent (histamine h2-receptor antagonist)

### indications
+ prophylaxis of acid pulmonary aspiration syndrome in anaesthesia:
    - in patients with a full stomach (emergency caesarean section, etc.)
    - when a difficult intubation is expected

### presentation
+ 200 mg effervescent tablet
also comes 800 mg effervescent tablet.

### dosage and duration
+ adult: 200 to 400 mg as a single dose if possible one hour before anaesthetic induction

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ may cause: diarrhoea, headache, dizziness, skin rash, fever.
+ do not administer with an antacid (aluminium hydroxide, etc.).

### remarks
+ effervescent cimetidine can be replaced by effervescent ranitidine, another h2-receptor antagonist, as a single dose of 150 mg.
+ the onset of acid inhibition with cimetidine non-effervescent tablets (200 mg, 400 mg and 800 mg film coated tablets) or ranitidine non-effervescent tablets (150 mg and 300 mg film coated tablets) occurs 30 minutes after administration. the effervescent tablets containing sodium citrate have a more rapid onset of action, and can thus be used for emergency surgery.
+ omeprazole, another antiulcer agent (proton pump inhibitor), is not compatible with emergency situations as it must be administered at least 4 hours before surgery.
+ cimetidine in film coated tablets is also used in the treatment of gastro-oesophageal reflux and peptic ulcer. use by preference ranitidine or omeprazole for these indications.
+ storage: below 25°c