# ciprofloxacin

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ fluoroquinolone antibacterial

### indications
+ shigellosis, typhoid fever, cutaneous anthrax
+ uncomplicated acute cystitis in non-pregnant women or in the event of previous treatment failure, acute prostatitis, uncomplicated acute pyelonephritis, chancroid

### presentation
+ 250 mg and 500 mg tablets
+ 250 mg/5 ml granules and solvent for oral suspension

### dosage
+ shigellosis, typhoid fever, cutaneous anthrax
child over 1 month: 30 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses (max. 1 g/day)
adult: 1 g/day in 2 divided doses
age
1 to < 3 months
3 to < 7 months
7 months to < 2 years
2 to < 3 years
3 to < 8 years
8 to < 11 years
≥ 11 years and adult

weight
4 to < 6 kg
6 to < 8 kg
8 to < 12 kg
12 to < 15 kg
15 to < 26 kg
26 to < 36 kg
≥ 36 kg

250 mg/5 ml susp.
1.5 ml x 2
2 ml x 2
2.5 ml x 2
4 ml x 2
5 ml x 2
8 ml x 2
^-

250 mg tablet
1 tab x 2
2 tab x 2

500 mg tablet
1 tab x 2

+ uncomplicated acute cystitis in non-pregnant women
adult: 500 mg/day in 2 divided doses
+ acute cystitis (in the event of recurrence or treatment failure), acute prostatitis, chancroid
adult: 1 g/day in 2 divided doses
+ uncomplicated acute pyelonephritis
adult: 1 to 1.5 g/day in 2 to 3 divided doses

### duration
+ shigellosis, uncomplicated cystitis, chancroid: 3 days; cystitis (in the event of recurrence or treatment failure): 5 days; typhoid fever: 5 to 7 days; pyelonephritis: 7 days; cutaneous anthrax: 7 to 10 days; prostatitis: 28 days

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with history of allergy or tendinitis due to fluoroquinolones.
+ administer with caution to epileptic patients (risk of seizures).
+ reduce the dose by half in patients with renal impairment.
+ may cause: gastrointestinal disturbances, neurological disorders (headache, dizziness, confusion, hallucinations, seizures), allergic reaction, peripheral neuropathy, photosensitivity (protect skin from sun exposure), arthralgia, myalgia, tendon damage (especially achilles tendinitis), qt interval prolongation, hypo/hyperglycaemia, haemolytic anaemia in patients with g6pd deficiency. in the event of allergic reaction, severe neurological disorders, peripheral neuropathy or tendinitis, stop treatment immediately.
+ avoid combination with drugs that prolong the qt interval (amiodarone, chloroquine, co-artemether, fluconazole, haloperidol, mefloquine, ondansetron, pentamidine, quinine, etc.).
+ monitor patients taking glibenclamide (risk of hypoglycaemia).
+ do not administer simultaneously with antacids (aluminium or magnesium hydroxide, etc.), iron salts, calcium. administer 2 hours apart.
+ drink a lot of liquid during treatment (risk of crystalluria).
+ *pregnancy*: reserved for severe infections, when there is no therapeutic alternative.
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ storage: below 25°c