# clindamycin

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ lincosamide antibacterial

### indications
+ severe staphylococcal and/or streptococcal infections (e.g. erysipelas, cellulitis, cutaneous anthrax, pneumonia):
    - in betalactam-allergic patients
    - in infections due to methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus
+ completion treatment following parental therapy with clindamycin

### presentation
+ 150 mg and 300 mg capsules

### dosage
+ child: 30 to 40 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses
+ adult: 1800 mg/day in 3 divided doses
age

weight

150 mg capsule

300 mg capsule

20 to < 30 kg

-

1 cap x 3

-

2 cap x 3

1 to < 6 years

10 to < 20 kg

9 to < 13 years

30 to < 45 kg

6 to < 9 years

≥ 13 years and adult

### duration
≥ 45 kg

1 cap x 3
3 cap x 3

-
-

+ erysipelas, cellulitis: 7 to 10 days; cutaneous anthrax: 7 to 14 days depending on severity; pneumonia: 10 to 14 days

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with allergy to lincosamides or history of pseudomembranous colitis.
+ reduce dosage in patients with hepatic impairment.
+ may cause: pseudomembranous colitis, rash, jaundice, severe allergic reactions. in these cases, stop treatment.
+ in the event of pseudomembranous colitis, treat for clostridium difficile infection (oral metronidazole).
+ do not administer simultaneously with antacids (aluminium or magnesium hydroxide, etc.). administer 2 hours apart.
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication
+ *breast-feeding*: use only when there is no therapeutic alternative. check infant’s stools (risk of pseudomembranous colitis).

### remarks
+ capsules are not suitable for children under 6 years (risk of aspiration). open the capsule and mix the content into a spoon with food or fruit juice to mask the unpleasant taste.
+ clindamycin is use in combination with quinine for the treatment of malaria in pregnant women (20 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses for 7 days).
+ also comes in 75 mg/5 ml oral suspension.
+ storage: below 25°c