# clomipramine

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action

+ tricyclic antidepressant

### indications
+ major depression
+ prevention of panic attacks

### presentation
+ 25 mg tablet
also comes in 10 mg tablet.

### dosage
+ adult: initial dose of 25 mg once daily at bedtime, then increase gradually over one week to 75 mg once
daily at bedtime (max. 150 mg/day).
+ reduce the dose by half in elderly patients and in patients with hepatic or renal impairment.

### duration
+ depression: 6 months minimum. the treatment should be discontinued gradually (dose tapered over
4 weeks). if signs of relapse occur, increase the dose.
+ prevention of panic attacks: 2 to 3 months once panic attacks cease then discontinue gradually over
4 weeks.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with recent myocardial infarction, arrhythmia, closed-angle glaucoma,
prostate disorders.
+ administer with caution and carefully monitor use in patients > 60 years and in patients with epilepsy,
chronic constipation, renal or hepatic impairment, history of bipolar disorders.
+ may cause:
    - drowsiness (caution when driving/operating machinery) or insomnia, orthostatic hypotension, sexual dysfunction;
    - anticholinergic effects: dry mouth, blurred vision, constipation, tachycardia, disorders of micturition. these adverse effects are transitory or disappear with dose reduction. treatment should be discontinued in the event of severe reactions (mental confusion, urinary retention, cardiac rhythm disorders);
    - psychic disorders: exacerbation of anxiety, possibility of a suicide attempt at the beginning of therapy, manic episode during treatment.
+ do not combine with another antidepressant.
+ monitor combination with cns depressants (opioid analgesics, sedatives, h1 antihistamines, etc.), drugs known to have anticholinergic effects (atropine, chlorpromazine, promethazine, etc.), drugs which lower the seizure threshold (antipsychotics, mefloquine, tramadol, etc.), lithium and other serotonergics.
+ avoid alcohol during treatment.
+ *pregnancy*: re-evaluate whether the treatment is still necessary; if it is continued, observe the newborn infant the first few days (risk of neurological and gastrointestinal disorders).
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ the antidepressant effect is not immediate. it is necessary to wait 3 weeks before assessing therapeutic efficacy. this must be explained to the patient.
+ clomipramine causes less sedation, anticholinergic effects and orthostatic hypotension than
amitriptyline.
+ storage: below 25°c