# cotrimoxazole = sulfamethoxazole (smx)/trimethoprim (tmp)

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ combination of a sulfonamide with another antibacterial

### indications
+ first-line treatment of pneumocystosis and isosporiasis
+ prophylaxis of pneumocystosis, toxoplasmosis and isosporiasis
+ brucellosis (when doxycycline is contra-indicated)

### presentation
+ 400 mg smx + 80 mg tmp and 800 mg smx + 160 mg tmp tablets
+ 100 mg smx + 20 mg tmp tablet for paediatric use
+ 200 mg smx + 40 mg tmp/5 ml oral suspension

### dosage and duration
+ treatment of pneumocystosis  
    child: 100 mg smx + 20 mg tmp/kg/day in 2 divided doses  
    adult: 4800 smx + 960 tmp/day in 3 divided doses
+ treatment of isosporiasis  
    adult: 3200 mg smx + 640 mg tmp/day in 2 divided doses
+ prophylaxis of pneumocystosis, toxoplasmosis and isosporiasis  
    child: 50 mg smx + 10 mg tmp/kg once daily, as long as necessary  
    adult: 800 mg smx + 160 mg tmp once daily, as long as necessary
+ brucellosis  
    child: 40 mg smx + 8 mg tmp/kg/day in 2 divided doses  
    adult: 1600 mg smx + 320 mg tmp/day in 2 divided doses

### duration
+ pneumocystosis: 14 to 21 days depending on severity; isosporiasis: 10 days; brucellosis: 6 weeks

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to children under 1 month.
+ do not administer to sulfonamide-allergic patients; patients with severe renal or hepatic impairment.
+ may cause:
    - gastrointestinal disturbances, hepatic or renal disorders (crystalluria, etc.), metabolic disorders (hyperkalaemia); neuropathy, photosensitivity, haemolytic anaemia in patients with g6pd deficiency;
    - allergic reactions (fever, rash, etc.) sometimes severe (lyell's and stevens-johnson syndromes, haematological disorders, etc.). in these cases, stop treatment immediately;
    - megaloblastic anaemia due to folinic acid deficiency in patients receiving prolonged treatment (in this event, administer calcium folinate).
+ adverse effects occur more frequently in patients with hiv infection.
+ in the event of prolonged treatment, monitor blood count if possible.
+ do not combine with methotrexate and phenytoin.
+ avoid combination with drugs inducing hyperkalaemia: potassium, spironolactone, enalapril, nsaids, heparin (increased risk of hyperkalaemia).
+ monitor combination with zidovudine (increased haematotoxicity).
+ drink a lot of liquid during treatment.
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication. however, avoid using during the last month of pregnancy (risk of jaundice and haemolytic anaemia in the newborn infant).
+ *breast-feeding*: avoid if premature infant, jaundice, low-birth weight, infant under one month of age. if cotrimoxazole is used, observe the infant for signs of jaundice.

### remarks
+ storage: below 5°c
once the bottle has been opened, the oral suspension keeps for 20 days at ambient temperature or 40 days refrigerated (between 2°c and 8°c).