# desogestrel

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision
### therapeutic action

+ hormonal contraceptive, progestogen

### indications
+ oral contraception

### presentation
+ 75 micrograms (0.075 mg) tablet, 28-day pack

### dosage
+ 1 tablet daily at the same time, continuously, including during menstruation start the first day of menstruation or immediately after abortion or as of the 21st day after childbirth if the woman does not breastfeed. it is also possible to start at any moment of the cycle (if the woman is not pregnant). in this case, contraception will be effective as of the 3rd tablet. it is essential to use condoms during the first 2 days.

### duration
+ if there are no adverse effects, as long as contraception is desired.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to women with breast cancer, severe or recent liver disease, unexplained vaginal bleeding, current thromboembolic disorders.
+ may cause: amenorrhoea, menstrual disturbances, nausea, weight gain, breast tenderness, mood changes, acne, headache.
+ hepatic enzyme inducers (rifampicin, rifabutin, nevirapine, ritonavir, phenobarbital, phenytoin,  carbamazepine, griseofulvin, etc.) reduce the contraceptive efficacy. use copper intrauterine device or condoms or injectable medroxyprogesterone.
+ *pregnancy*: contra-indicated
+ *breast-feeding*: it is recommended to wait 6 weeks after childbirth before starting desogestrel in breastfeeding women. however, if it is the only contraceptive method available or acceptable, it can be started 3 weeks after childbirth.

### remarks
+ desogestrel is a possible alternative when estroprogestogens are contra-indicated or poorly tolerated. it is preferred to levonorgestrel as its contraceptive efficacy is similar to that of estroprogestogens.
+ if a woman misses a tablet, she should take it as soon as possible and continue treatment as normal. if she misses by over 12 hours, contraceptive protection will be lessened. it is therefore recommended to use an additional contraceptive method: condoms for 7 days and, if she has had sexual intercourse within 5 days before forgetting the tablet, emergency contraception.
+ storage: below 25°c