# diazepam

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision
### therapeutic action

+ anxiolytic, sedative, anticonvulsant, muscle relaxant

### indications
+ agitation and anxiety
+ muscle spasms

### presentation
+ 5 mg tablet
also comes in 2 mg and 10 mg tablets and 1% oral solution.

### dosage
+ adult: 5 to 15 mg/day in 3 divided doses
+ do not exceed indicated doses.

### duration
+ according to clinical response ; the shortest duration possible.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with severe respiratory insufficiency or severe hepatic impairment.
+ may cause:
    - feeling of inebriation, drowsiness (administer with caution when driving or operating machinery);
    - dependence and tolerance when used for more than 10-15 days. at the end of treatment, reduce doses gradually to avoid withdrawal syndrome or rebound effect;
    - in the event of overdose: ataxia, muscular weakness, hypotension, confusion, lethargy, respiratory depression, coma.
+ reduce the dose by one half in elderly patients and in patients with renal or hepatic impairment.
+ risk of increased sedation when combined with alcohol and drugs acting on the central nervous system: opioid analgesics, neuroleptics (chlorpromazine, haloperidol, etc.), antihistamines (chlorphenamine, promethazine), antidepressants (clomipramine, fluoxetine, etc.), phenobarbital, etc.
+ *pregnancy*: avoid
+ *breast-feeding*: avoid

### remarks
+ diazepam is subject to international controls: follow national regulations.
+ diazepam is not a treatment for depression, chronic anxiety, or post-traumatic stress syndrome.
+ storage: below 25°c