# diethylcarbamazine

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision
### therapeutic action

+ anthelminthic (antifilarial)

### indications
+ lymphatic filariasis

### presentation
+ 50 mg and 100 mg tablets

### dosage
+ child under 10 years: 0.5 mg/kg as a single dose on the first day, then increase the dose gradually over 3 days to 3 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses
+ child over 10 years and adult: 1 mg/kg as a single dose on the first day, then increase the dose gradually over 3 days to 6 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses

### duration
+ w. bancrofti: 12 days; b. malayi, b. timori: 6 to 12 days

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with onchocerciasis or heavy loa loa microfilareamia; to infants, elderly patients and patients with heart or renal diseases.
+ do not administer during an acute attack.
+ administer with caution in patients with history of seizures.
+ may cause:
    - nausea, vomiting, headache, dizziness, drowsiness, fever, joint pain, urticaria, transient haematuria, subcutaneous nodules, lymphangitis, localized oedema;
    - in patients with associated onchocerciasis: severe ocular damages (optic nerve lesions, retinal lesions);
    - in patients with associated loiasis: encephalitis (potentially fatal) if loa loa microfilaraemia is high.
+ reduce dosage in patients with renal impairment.
+ *pregnancy*: contra-indicated (treatment may be deferred until after delivery)
+ *breast-feeding*: not recommended

### remarks
+ in countries with a national programme for the elimination of bancroftian filariasis, the combination diethylcarbamazine + albendazole is administered as a single annual dose for 4 to 6 years. this regimen is only suitable for countries that are free from onchocerca volvulus and/or loa loa.
+ diethylcarbamazine is included in the who complementary list of essential medicines.
+ storage: between 15°c and 25°c