# digoxin

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ cardiotonic

### indications
+ supraventricular arrhythmias (fibrillation, flutter, paroxysmal tachycardia)
+ heart failure

### presentation
+ 62.5 µg (0.0625 mg) and 250 µg (0.25 mg) tablets
also comes in 50 µg/ml oral solution (0.05 mg/ml).

### dosage
+ adult:
    - loading dose: 750 to 1500 µg (0.75 to 1.5 mg) in 3 to 4 divided doses. do not exceed 1500 µg during the first 24 hours.
    - maintenance dose: 125 to 250 µg/day (0.125 to 0.25 mg) once daily or in 2 divided doses
+ reduce the dose by one half in elderly patients and in patients with renal impairment.

### duration
+ according to clinical response

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
do not administer to patients with bradycardia, ill defined arrhythmia, coronary artery disease.
it is essential to monitor pulse in the initial stage of treatment.
narrow margin between therapeutic and toxic dose.
may cause in the event of overdose: gastrointestinal disturbances (nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea), blurred vision, headache, confusion, conduction and rhythm disorders. if so, reduce dose or stop treatment.
do not combine with calcium, particularly by iv route (serious arrhythmias).
monitor combination with:
    - amiodarone, macrolides, itraconazole, quinine, chloroquine (increased digoxin concentration);
    - potassium-depleting drugs: diuretics, corticoids, amphotericin b (increased risk of digoxin toxicity).
monitor if possible serum potassium level in patients taking potassium-depleting drugs and serum creatinine level in patients with renal impairment.
do not administer simultaneously with antacids such as aluminium hydroxide, etc., administer 2 hours apart.
*pregnancy*: no contra-indication
*breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ a loading dose may be administered in arrhythmias if a rapid digitalisation is required. it is usually not necessary for heart failure.
+ storage: below 25°c