# efavirenz = efv = efz

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ antiretroviral, hiv-1 non nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor

### indications
+ hiv-1 infection, in combination with other antiretroviral drugs

### presentation
+ 200 mg breakable tablet, 200 mg capsule and 200 mg and 600 mg tablets

### dosage
+ the dose is given once daily at bedtime:
weight

10 to < 15 kg
15 to < 20 kg
20 to < 25 kg
25 to < 33 kg
33 to < 40 kg
≥ 40 kg

### duration
capsules or tablets
200 mg
250 mg
300 mg
350 mg
400 mg
600 mg

+ depending on the efficacy and tolerance of efavirenz.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to children under 3 years.
+ avoid administration in patients with severe hepatic impairment.
+ administer with caution to patients with psychiatric disorders (or history of) or epilepsy.
+ do not combine with amodiaquine.
+ may cause:
    - neurological disorders (dizziness, insomnia, drowsiness, abnormal dreaming, impaired concentration, seizures);
    - psychiatric disorders (severe depression, suicidal ideation);
    - raised liver enzymes (alat);
    - skin reactions, possibly severe (stevens-johnson syndrome).
+ efavirenz reduces the efficacy of oral contraceptives: use a non-hormonal contraception or injectable
medroxyprogesterone or an oral contraceptive containing 50 µg ethinylestradiol per tablet.
+ *pregnancy*: avoid; effective contraception must be used during treatment.

### remarks
+ many fixed-dose combinations containing efavirenz are available.
+ storage: below 25°c