# enalapril

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ antihypertensive, vasodilator (angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor)

### indications
+ hypertension
+ congestive heart failure

### presentation
+ 2.5 mg, 5 mg and 20 mg tablets

### dosage and duration
+ hypertension
adult: initially 5 mg once daily, then increase the dose every 1 to 2 weeks, according to blood pressure,
up to 10 to 40 mg once daily or in 2 divided doses
in elderly patients, patients taking a diuretic or patients with renal impairment: start with 2.5 mg once
daily as there is a risk of hypotension and/or acute renal impairment.
+ congestive heart failure
adult: 2.5 mg once daily, then increase the dose over 2 to 4 weeks, up to 10 to 20 mg once daily or in
2 divided doses

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with history of hypersensitivity to enalapril.
+ may cause:
    - hypotension, dry cough at night, hyperkalaemia, headache, dizziness, nausea, renal impairment;
    - allergic reactions, angioedema;
    - rarely: hepatitis, neutropenia and agranulocytosis in immunodeficient patients, anaemia in patients with chronic renal impairment.
+ reduce dosage in patients with renal impairment.
+ do not combine with potassium-sparing diuretics (spironolactone) or potassium.
+ monitor, if possible, serum creatinine and potassium levels (hyperkalaemia is frequent but of no concern if it remains below 5.5 meq/litre).
+ in patients taking a diuretic, reduce the dose of the diuretic when adding enalapril.
+ *pregnancy*: contra-indicated
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication at recommended doses

### remarks
+ captopril has the same indications as enalapril, however its dosage differs and it must be taken 2 to
3 times daily.
+ storage: below 25°c