# ergocalciferol = vitamin d2 And colecalciferol = vitamin d3

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision
### therapeutic action

+ vitamin necessary for the intestinal absorption of calcium and phosphate and for normal bone calcification

### indications
+ prevention and treatment of vitamin d deficiencies (rickets, osteomalacia)

### presentation
+ 1.25 mg tablet or capsule (50 000 iu)
+ 250 µg/ml oral suspension (10 000 iu/ml)
also comes in different strengths, depending on the manufacturers.

### dosage and duration
ergocalciferol and colecalciferol are used at the same doses:
+ prevention of vitamin d deficiencies
    - 50 000 iu tablet or capsule:
child under 5 years: 100 000 iu every 3 months, during periods of limited sunlight
child over 5 years and adult: 100 000 iu every 3 months or 200 000 iu every 6 months
pregnant woman: 100 000 iu around the 6th-7th month of pregnancy
    - 10 000 iu/ml oral suspension:
child and adult: 400 iu once daily (10 µg daily) during periods of limited sunlight
for children rarely exposed to sunlight or dark-skinned children, doses may be doubled.
+ treatment of vitamin d deficiencies
child and adult: 800 to 4000 iu once daily (20 to 100 µg daily) for 6 to 12 weeks, then continue with
preventive dose
+ do not exceed 600 000 iu/year.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with hypercalcaemia, hypercalciuria, calcic lithiasis.
+ stop treatment if signs of overdosage occur: headache, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, increased thirst, polyuria.
+ avoid combination with thiazide diuretics (hydrochlorothiazide, etc.).
+ monitor, if possible, calcaemia and calciuria during curative treatment.
+ combine with a calcium supplementation at the start of curative treatment (500 mg to 1 g/day).
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication. when curative treatment is being administered to the mother, do not give vitamin d to the child.

### remarks
+ the number of iu per drop of oral solution varies according to manufacturers. check instructions for use.
+ vitamin d2 and d3 also come in ampoules for oral and/or parenteral use.
+ storage: below 25°c
once opened, oral solution keeps 3 months.