# erythromycin

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ macrolide antibacterial

### indications
erythromycin is an alternative to first-line antibacterials when they are not available or contra-indicated:
+ borreliosis (louse-borne and tick-borne relapsing fevers), non-venereal treponematoses, leptospirosis, conjunctivitis due to chlamydia trachomatis
+ acute otitis media, tonsillitis and sinusitis; diphtheria, pertussis, pneumonia due to mycoplasma pneumoniae and chlamydophila pneumoniae
+ erysipela, impetigo, furuncle, leg ulcer
+ cervicitis and urethritis due to chlamydia trachomatis (in combination with a treatment for gonorrhoea), donovanosis, chancroid, lymphogranuloma venereum, syphilis
+ completion treatment following parenteral therapy with erythromycin

### presentation
+ 250 mg and 500 mg tablets
+ 125 mg/5 ml powder for oral suspension, to be reconstituted with filtered water

### dosage
+ louse-borne relapsing fever
child under 5 years: 250 mg as a single dose
child over 5 years and adult: 500 mg as a single dose
age
< 2 months
2 to < 12 months
1 to < 3 years
3 to < 8 years
8 to < 11 years
11 to < 13 years

weight
< 5 kg
5 to < 10 kg
10 to < 15 kg
15 to < 25 kg
25 to < 35 kg
35 to < 45 kg

125 mg/5 ml susp.
½ tsp x 2
1 tsp x 2
2 tsp x 2
2 tsp x 3
-
-

+ other indications
child: 30 to 50 mg/kg/day in 2 or 3 divided doses
adult: 2 to 3 g/day in 2 or 3 divided doses

250 mg tablet
¼ tab x 2
½ tab x 2
1 tab x 2
1 tab x 3
2 tab x 2
2 tab x 3

500 mg tablet
-
¼ tab x 2
½ tab x 2
½ tab x 3
1 tab x 2
1 tab x 3

### duration
+ tick-borne relapsing fever, leptospirosis, pertussis, cervicitis and urethritis, chancroid, impetigo, furuncle, leg ulcer: 7 days; sinusitis, erysipela: 7 to 10 days; tonsillitis, otitis: 10 days; atypical pneumonia:10 to 14 days; diphtheria, treponematoses, syphilis, lymphogranuloma venereum, donovanosis, conjunctivitis due to c. trachomatis: 14 days.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with allergy to erythromycin or another macrolide.
+ administer with caution to patients with renal impairment (max. 1.5 g/day for adult with severe renal impairment) or hepatic impairment.
+ may cause: gastrointestinal disturbances, reversible hearing disorders, heart rhythm disorders (qt prolongation); allergic reactions sometimes severe. in the event of allergic reaction, stop treatment immediately.
+ avoid combination with drugs that prolong the qt interval (amiodarone, chloroquine, co-artemether, fluconazole, haloperidol, mefloquine, moxifloxacin, ondansetron, pentamidine, quinine, etc.).
+ administer with caution and monitor use in patients taking carbamazepine or digoxin (increased their plasma levels).
+ avoid use in neonates less than 2 weeks (risk of pyloric stenosis).
+ pregnancy and *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ take tablets preferably one hour before or 2 hours after a meal.
+ storage: below 25°c
for the oral suspension (powder or reconstituted suspension): follow manufacturer’s instructions.