# ethinylestradiol/levonorgestrel

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ combined hormonal contraceptive, estrogen-progestogen

### indications
+ oral contraception

### presentation
+ 21-day pack: 21 active tablets of 30 micrograms ethinylestradiol + 150 micrograms levonorgestrel
+ 28-day pack: 21 active tablets of 30 micrograms ethinylestradiol + 150 micrograms levonorgestrel and 7 inactive tablets

### dosage
+ 21-day pack: 1 tablet daily at the same time, for 21 days, followed by a tablet-free interval of 7 days
+ 28-day pack: 1 tablet daily at the same time, with no interruption, even during menstruation start the first day of menstruation or immediately after abortion or as of the 21st day after childbirth if the woman does not breastfeed. it is also possible to start at any moment of the cycle (if the woman is not pregnant). in this case, contraception will be effective as of the 8th tablet. it is essential to use condoms during the first 7 days.

### duration
+ if there are no adverse effects, as long as contraception is desired.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to women with breast cancer, uncontrolled hypertension, uncontrolled or complicated diabetes, history of thromboembolic disorders, coronary insufficiency, valvular disease, stroke, severe or recent liver disease, unexplained vaginal bleeding, migraine with neurological signs, renal impairment, hyperlipidaemia, to women smokers over age 35.
+ may cause: reduced menstrual flow, vaginal candidiasis, nausea, weight gain, breast tenderness, mood changes, acne and headache. other rare and severe adverse effects require discontinuation of treatment: hypertension, cardiovascular and thromboembolic disorders, jaundice, migraine, visual disturbances.
+ hepatic enzyme inducers (rifampicin, rifabutin, nevirapine, ritonavir, phenobarbital, phenytoin, carbamazepine, griseofulvin, etc.) reduce the contraceptive efficacy. use a non-hormonal contraceptive method (copper intrauterine device, condoms) or injectable medroxyprogesterone, or as a last resort an oral contraceptive containing 50 micrograms ethinylestradiol (however there is a risk of contraceptive failure and risk of adverse effects is increased).
+ clinical examinations must be carried out before (blood pressure, breasts) and during treatment (blood pressure).
+ *pregnancy*: contra-indicated
+ *breast-feeding*: contra-indicated before 6 weeks; not recommended between 6 weeks and 6 months (except if it is the only available or acceptable contraceptive method); no contra-indication after 6 months.

### remarks
+ if a woman misses an active tablet, she should take it as soon as possible and continue treatment as normal. if she misses by over 12 hours, contraceptive protection will be lessened. it is therefore recommended to use an additional contraceptive method: condoms for 7 days and, if she has had sexual intercourse within 5 days before forgetting the tablet, emergency contraception.
+ 28-day packs can simplify use as there is no interruption between two packs. explain to the woman which are active and inactive tablets. she must be careful not to start with inactive tablets.
+ storage: below 25°c