# ferrous salts

### therapeutic action
+ antianaemia drug

### indications
+ prevention and treatment of iron-deficiency anaemia

### presentation
+ 200 mg ferrous sulfate tablet containing 65 mg of elemental iron
also comes in syrup and in different compositions and strengths.

dosage (expressed in elemental iron)
+ prevention of iron-deficiency anaemia
child under 5 years: 15 to 30 mg once daily
child over 5 years: 30 mg once daily
pregnant woman: 60 mg once daily
+ treatment of iron-deficiency anaemia
child under 2 years: 30 mg once daily
child from 2 to 12 years: 60 mg once daily
adult: 120 to 180 mg/day in 2 to 3 divided doses
+ do not exceed indicated doses.

= ¼ to ½ tab/day
= ½ tab/day
= 1 tab/day

= ½ tab/day
= 1 tab/day
= 2 to 3 tab/day

### duration
+ prevention: during risk period (pregnancy, malnutrition)
+ treatment: 3 months

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with sickle-cell anaemia.
+ may cause: gastrointestinal disturbances (epigastric pain, diarrhoea or constipation, black stools).
+ do not exceed recommended doses, especially in children.
+ toxic dose: 30 mg/kg of elemental iron (100 mg/kg of ferrous sulfate).
+ signs of overdose: bloody diarrhoea, heart failure.
+ absorption of both ferrous salts and doxycycline or antacids is decreased when they are given concomitantly. administer each drug at least 2 hours apart.
+ do not administer simultaneously with doxyccline or antacids: administer 2 hours apart.
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ take during meals to reduce gastrointestinal disturbances.
+ for treatment, preferably use tablets containing both ferrous salts and folic acid.
+ other ferrous salts may be used. ensure the dose of elemental iron is the same as that indicated above (200 mg ferrous fumarate = 65 mg elemental iron; 300 mg ferrous gluconate = 35 mg elemental iron).
+ storage: below 25°c