# fluconazole

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ antifungal

### indications-
-
-
-

+ oesophageal candidiasis
+ moderate to severe oropharyngeal candidiasis
+ secondary prophylaxis of recurrent candidiasis in immunocompromised patients
+ cryptococcocal meningitis, after treatment with amphotericin b + flucytosine or in combination with amphotericin b
+ secondary prophylaxis of cryptococcocal infections

### presentation
+ 50 mg, 100 mg and 200 mg capsules or tablets
+ 50 mg/5 ml oral solution

### dosage and duration
+ oesophageal candidiasis, oropharyngeal candidiasis, secondary prophylaxis of candidiasis
    child over 1 week: 3 to 6 mg/kg once daily
    adult: 50 to 200 mg once daily
these doses may be increased up to 400 mg/day if necessary. the treatment lasts 14 to 21 days for
oesophageal candidiasis; 7 to 14 days for oropharyngeal candidiasis; as long as required for secondary
prophylaxis.
+ cryptococcocal meningitis

after treatment with
amphotericin b + flucytosine

child > 1 week

6 to 12 mg/kg once daily (max. 800 mg/day) for
8 weeks

adult

400 to 800 mg once daily for 8 weeks

child > 1 week

12 mg/kg once daily (max. 800 mg/day) for
2 weeks (with amphotericin b) then 6 to
12 mg/kg once daily for 8 weeks

adult

800 mg once daily for 2 weeks (with
amphotericin b) then 400 to 800 mg once daily
for 8 weeks

or

in combination with
amphotericin b

+ secondary prophylaxis of cryptococcocal infections
child: 6 mg/kg once daily (max. 200 mg/day), as long as required
adult: 200 mg once daily, as long as required


### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ administer with caution to patients with hepatic or renal impairment, cardiac disorders (bradycardia,
heart rhythm disorders, etc.). reduce the dose by half in patients with renal impairment.
+ may cause: gastrointestinal disturbances, headache, skin reactions sometimes severe, anaphylactic
reactions; severe hepatic disorders, haematologic (leukopenia, thrombocytopenia) and cardiac disorders
(qt-prolongation). stop treatment in the event of anaphylactic reaction, hepatic disorders or severe skin
reaction.
+ in the event of prolonged treatment, monitor hepatic function.
+ do not administer simultaneously with rifampicin, administer 12 hours apart (rifampicin in the morning,
fluconazole in the evening).
+ avoid or monitor combination with:
    - drugs that prolong the qt interval (amiodarone, chloroquine, erythromycin, haloperidol, mefloquine,
pentamidine, quinine);
    - warfarin, carbamazepine, phenytoin, rifabutin, benzodiazepines, calcium-channel blockers, certain
antiretrovirals (e.g. nevirapine, saquinavir, zidovudine): increased blood concentration of these drugs.
+ pregnancy and *breast-feeding*: to be used only in severe or life-threatening infections, particularly during
the first trimester of pregnancy (risk of foetal malformations).

### remarks
+ for cryptococcocal meningitis, when amphotericin b is not available or not tolerated, fluconazole may be
administered alone:
child over 1 week: 12 mg/kg once daily (max. 1200 mg/d) for 2 weeks then, 12 mg/kg once daily (max.
800 mg/d) for 8 weeks
adult: 1200 mg once daily for 2 weeks then, 800 mg once daily for 8 weeks
+ for the treatment of histoplasmosis, fluconazole is less effective than itraconazole. it should be used
(child: 10 to 12 mg/kg once daily, max. 400 mg/d ; adult: 400 mg on day 1 then 200 to 400 mg once
daily, for 6 to 12 weeks) only in patients unable to tolerate itraconazole.
+ for the treatment of dermatophytosis of the scalp, fluconazole may be used as a secondary option
(child: 6 mg/kg once daily, max. 200 mg/d; adult: 200 mg once daily, for 2 to 4 weeks) but itraconazole is
preferred for this indication.
+ for the treatment of genital candidiasis (vulvovaginitis, balanitis), fluconazole is only used if local
treatment fails: 150 mg as a single dose in adults.
+ storage: below 25°c
once reconstituted, oral solution keeps for 2 weeks.