# flucytosine

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ antifungal

### indications
+ cryptococcocal meningitis (induction phase), in combination with amphotericin b

### presentation
+ 500 mg capsule
also comes in 250 mg capsule and 500 mg tablet.

### dosage and duration
+ child over 1 week and adult: 100 mg/kg/day in 4 divided doses for 2 weeks, in combination with amphotericin b

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ administer with caution and monitor use in patients > 60 years or with renal impairment or haematological disorders.
+ reduce the dose by half (50 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses) in patients with renal impairment.
+ may cause: gastrointestinal disturbances, haematological disorders (leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, less frequently, agranulocytosis), increase in transaminase levels, allergic reactions sometimes severe; sometimes, confusion and hallucinations.
+ monitor blood count and liver and renal function until the end of treatment.
+ pregnancy and *breast-feeding*: flucytosine is generally not recommended. it is teratogenic in animals and its safety in pregnant or lactating women has not been established. however, taking into account the severity of the disease, the potential benefit of treatment for the mother and in the absence of a safer alternative, it may be used despite the potential risks for the child.

### remarks
+ if amphotericin b is not available, flucytosine may be used at the same dose in combination with fluconazole.
+ for children, tablets may be crushed.
+ storage: below 25°c