# fluoxetine

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision
### therapeutic action

+ antidepressant, selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor (ssri)

### indications
+ major depression

### presentation
+ 20 mg capsule

### dosage
+ adult: 20 mg once daily in the morning
+ administer 20 mg on alternate days to patients with hepatic impairment or severe renal impairment.

### duration
+ 6 months minimum. the treatment should be discontinued gradually (20 mg on alternate days for
2 weeks). if signs of relapse occur, increase the dose.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ administer with caution and monitor use in patients with epilepsy, diabetes, history of gastrointestinal
bleeding or bipolar disorders.
+ may cause:
    - allergic reactions (rare): stop treatment;
    - insomnia or drowsiness (caution when driving/operating machinery), gastrointestinal disturbances
(take during a meal), headache, dizziness, blurred vision;
    - psychic disorders: exacerbation of anxiety, possibility of a suicide attempt at the beginning of therapy,
manic episode during the course treatment;
    - withdrawal symptoms (dizziness, paresthesia, nightmares, etc.) possible if the treatment is
discontinued abruptly.
+ do not combine with another antidepressant.
+ monitor combination (up to 5 weeks after the discontinuation of fluoxetine) with: carbamazepine,
haloperidol, risperidone, phenytoin (increases they toxicity), drugs which lower the seizure threshold
(antispychotics, mefloquine, tramadol, etc.), lithium and other serotonergics.
+ avoid aspirin and nsaids (risk of bleeding) and alcohol during treatment.
+ *pregnancy*: re-evaluate whether the treatment is still necessary; if it is continued, observe the newborn
infant if the mother was under treatment in the 3rd trimester (risk of irritability, tremors, hypotony,
sleeping disorders, etc.).
+ *breast-feeding*: avoid. prefer paroxetine or amitriptyline.

### remarks
+ do not open the capsules.
+ the antidepressant effect is not immediate. it is necessary to wait 3 weeks before assessing therapeutic
efficacy. this must be explained to the patient.
+ in case of insufficient response after 4 weeks, dosage may be increased to 40 mg/day, except in patients
with hepatic impairment or severe renal impairment.
+ in elderly patients, ssri are preferred to tricyclics (less contraindications, less adverse effects).
+ storage: below 25°c
