# glibenclamide

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision
### therapeutic action

+ sulphonylurea hypoglycaemic which stimulates secretion of pancreatic insulin

### indications
+ adult-onset diabetes, insulin-independent and not controlled by well followed diet
measurement of blood glucose levels is essential in establishing diagnosis and control of the disease
process.

### presentation
+ 2.5 mg and 5 mg tablets
also comes in 1.25 mg tablet.

### dosage
+ adult: initially, 2.5 to 5 mg once daily in the morning
adjust dosage until diabetic control is obtained; maximum dose: 15 mg/day.
adjust dosage gradually and very cautiously for elderly patients.

### duration
+ according to clinical response and laboratory tests

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer if:
    - insulin-dependent diabetes, juvenile diabetes mellitus;
    - severe renal or hepatic function impairment; allergy to sulphonamides.
+ may cause:
    - hypoglycaemia due to excessive doses, especially in elderly patients; insufficient intake of sugar;
hepatic or renal failure. treat mild hypoglycaemia with intake of oral sugar and iv injection of
hypertonic glucose solution if severe; adjust dosage;
    - allergic reactions.
+ avoid combination with: co-trimoxazole, aspirin and other anti-inflammatory drugs, beta-blockers (risk
of hypoglycaemia), barbiturates, glucocorticoids, oral contraceptives (antagonise hypoglycaemic effect),
etc.
+ avoid combination with alcohol: antabuse reaction.
+ *pregnancy*: contra-indicated during the third trimester
+ *breast-feeding*: contra-indicated

### remarks
+ use only when diabetes cannot be controlled with diet alone, and monitor blood-glucose levels
regularly.
+ use of oral antidiabetics does not mean dietetic measures should be cancelled.
+ insulin may be required in patients having surgery.
+ chlorpropamide is a long-acting sulphonylurea hypoglycaemic used at doses of 125 to 250 mg once
daily. risk of hypoglycaemia is higher than with other antidiabetics.
+ storage: below 25°c

