# glyceryl trinitrate = nitroglycerin = trinitrin

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision
### therapeutic action

+ vasodilator, antianginal

### indications
+ short-term prophylaxis and treatment of angina

### presentation
+ 0.5 mg sublingual tablet

### dosage
+ short-term prophylaxis of acute angina (sublingually)
adult: 0.5 to 1 mg taken 5 to 10 minutes before a precipitating event (exercise, stress, etc.)
+ treatment of acute angina (sublingually)
adult: 0.5 to 1 mg, to be repeated 1 to 3 times at 3-4 minute intervals
maximum dose: 3 mg/day

### duration
+ according to clinical response

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with obstructive cardiomyopathy, hypotension, shock.
+ may cause: orthostatic hypotension (especially in elderly patients), headache, nausea, flushing of the
face, haemolysis in patients with g6pd deficiency, severe hypotension with risk of circulatory collapse in
the event of overdose.
+ use the lowest effective dose in patients taking another nitrate derivative, a vasodilator or an
antihypertensive drug and in elderly patients.
+ combination with antihypertensive drugs, diuretics, vasodilators and alcohol enhances hypotensive
effects.
+ do not combine with sildenafil (risk of acute coronary syndrome).
+ *pregnancy*: not recommended (safety is not established)
+ *breast-feeding*: not recommended (safety is not established)

### remarks
+ tablet must be crunched first, then slowly dissolved under the tongue.
+ antianginal effect appears within less than 5 minutes and persists for less than 1 hour.
+ sustained-release formulations are used for the long-term management of angina and the treatment of
congestive heart failure.
-
+ storage: below 25°c, preferably in airtight glass container -

