# griseofulvin

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ antifungal

### indications
+ dermatophyte infections of the scalp (scalp ringworm)
+ dermatophyte infections of the skin and folds, in the event of extended lesions or if the topical treatment has failed

### presentation
+ 125 mg and 500 mg tablets
also comes in 250 mg tablet and 125 mg/5 ml oral solution.

### dosage
+ child 1 to 12 years: 10 to 20 mg/kg once daily or in 2 divided doses, during meals (max. 500 mg/day)
+ child over 12 years and adult: 500 mg to 1 g once daily or in 2 divided doses, during meals (max. 1 g/day)

age

weight

125 mg/5 ml susp.

125 mg tablet

500 mg tablet

13 to < 24 kg

10 ml

2 tab

½ tab

≥ 35 kg

-

4 to 8 tab

1 to 2 tab

1 to < 2 years

10 to < 13 kg

7 to < 12 years

24 to < 35 kg

2 to < 7 years

≥ 12 years and adult

5 ml
-

1 tab
4 tab

¼ tab
1 tab

### duration
+ scalp: 6 weeks on average
+ skin and folds: 4 to 6 weeks

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with hepatic impairment, lupus erythematous, porphyria (may trigger attacks of acute porphyria).
+ may cause: gastrointestinal disturbances, headache, skin reactions (eruption, urticaria, etc.); photosensitivity (protect exposed skin from sun exposure).
+ monitor patients taking warfarin (anticoagulant effect decreased).
+ avoid alcohol during treatment (antabuse effect).
+ pregnancy and *breast-feeding*: contra-indicated. apply a topical treatment (miconazole 2% cream or whitfield ointment) in order to limit the lesions until it is possible to use griseofulvin.

### remarks
+ for young children, if the oral solution is not available, crush the tablet and mix it with a liquid.
+ storage: below 25°c