# haloperidol

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ antipsychotic (neuroleptic)

### indications
+ acute or chronic psychosis
+ severe anxiety not controlled by benzodiazepines

### presentation
+ 5 mg tablet
+ 2 mg/ml oral solution (1 ml = 20 drops)
also comes in 0.5 and 2 mg tablets.

### dosage
+ acute or chronic psychosis  
    adult: 2 to 10 mg/day in 2 divided doses. if necessary, these doses may be gradually increased up to 20 mg/day according to clinical response. once the patient is stable, the maintenance dose is administered once daily in the evening.
+ severe anxiety not controlled by benzodiazepines  
    adult: 1 mg/day (10 drops/day) in 2 divided doses
+ whatever the indication, reduce the dose by half in elderly patients.
+ use the lowest effective dose, especially in the event of prolonged treatment.

### duration
+ acute psychosis: minimum 3 months; chronic psychosis: minimum one year. the treatment should be discontinued gradually (over 4 weeks). if signs of relapse occur, increase the dose.
+ severe anxiety: maximum 4 weeks.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with cardiac disorders (cardiac failure, recent myocardial infarction, conduction disorders, bradycardia, etc.); to elderly patients with dementia (e.g. alzheimer's disease).
+ administer with caution and carefully monitor use in patients > 60 years and patients with hypokalaemia, hyperthyroidism, renal or hepatic impairment, parkinson's disease.
+ may cause: drowsiness (caution when driving/operating machinery), extrapyramidal syndrome, early and tardive dyskinesia, sexual dysfunction, qt-prolongation, ventricular arrhythmia, orthostatic hypotension; neuroleptic malignant syndrome (unexplained hyper thermia with neuromuscular disorders), rare but requiring immediate treatment discontinuation.
+ in the event of extrapyramidal symptoms, combine with biperiden.
+ avoid combination with: carbamazepine, rifampicin, fluoxetine, lithium, drugs that prolong the qt interval (amiodarone, chloroquine, erythromycin, fluconazole, mefloquine, pentamidine, quinine).
+ avoid alcohol during treatment.
+ *pregnancy*: re-evaluate whether the treatment is still necessary; if it is continued, monitor the newborn infant for reversible extrapyramidal effects (tremors) if the mother was under high dose treatment in the 3rd trimester.
+ *breast-feeding*: avoid; if absolutely necessary, administer less than 5 mg/day.

### remarks
+ haloperidol produces less orthostatic hypotension than chlorpromazine and has little anticholinergic effects. it is less sedative than chlorpromazine but produces more extrapyramidal symptoms.
+ storage: below 25°c