# ibuprofen

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ analgesic, antipyretic, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory (nsaid)

### indications
+ mild to moderate pain, fever, rheumatic diseases

### presentation
+ 200 mg and 400 mg enteric-coated tablets
+ 100 mg/5 ml oral suspension, with pipette graduated per kg of body weight (each kg graduation
corresponds to 10 mg ibuprofen)

### dosage
+ *pain, fever*
    child over 3 months: 30 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses (= one pipette filled up to the graduation corresponding to the child's weight, 3 times per day)
    adult: 1200 to 1800 mg/day in 3 to 4 divided doses  
    in post-operative period, ibuprofen should be given on a regular basis, every 8 hours, rather than “as needed”.

| age                   | weight        | 100 mg/5 ml susp.         | 200 mg tablet  | 400 mg tablet  |
|-----------------------|---------------|---------------------------|----------------|----------------|
| 3 months to < 6 years | 5 to < 20 kg  | use the graduated pipette | -              | -              |
| 6 to < 12 years       | 20 to < 40 kg |                           | 1 to 2 tab x 3 | -              |
| ≥ 12 years and adult  | ≥ 40 kg       | -                         | 2 tab x 3 or 4 | 1 tab x 3 or 4 |


+ *rheumatoid arthritis*  
    child: up to 40 mg/kg/day maximum  
    adult: up to 3200 mg/day maximum

### duration
+ according to clinical response; post-operative pain: 8 days maximum

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to children under 3 months, patients with allergy to nsaid, peptic ulcer, coagulation defects, haemorrhage, surgery with risk of major blood loss, severe renal or hepatic impairment, severe heart failure, severe malnutrition, uncorrected dehydration or hypovolaemia, severe infection.
+ may cause: allergic reactions, epigastric pain, peptic ulcer, haemorrhage, renal impairment.
+ administer with caution to elderly or asthmatic patients.
+ do not combine with: methotrexate, anticoagulants and other nsaids.
+ monitor combination with diuretics and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (drink plenty of fluids to avoid renal failure).
+ *pregnancy*: avoid. contra-indicated from the beginning of the 6th month. use paracetamol.
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication (short term treatment)

### remarks
+ take with meals.
+ clean the graduated pipette after use. shake the bottle before use.
+ if ibuprofen alone does not provide pain relief, combine with paracetamol and/or an opioid analgesic.
+ storage: below 25°c
+ once opened, oral suspension must be stored between 8°c and 15°c.