# ipratropium bromide nebuliser solution

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ bronchodilator, anticholinergic drug

### indications
+ acute life-threatening asthma attack, in combination with salbutamol

### presentation and route of administration
+ solution for inhalation, in unit dose vial of 0.25 mg in 1 ml (0.25 mg/ml) and 0.5 mg in 2 ml (0.25 mg/ml), to be administered via a nebuliser

### dosage and duration
+ child 1 month to < 12 years: 0.25 mg/nebulisation, to be repeated every 20 to 30 minutes if necessary
+ child 12 years and over and adult: 0.5 mg/nebulisation, to be repeated every 20 to 30 minutes if necessary
+ the nebuliser should always be driven by oxygen.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ may cause:
    - throat irritation, headache, cough, vomiting;
    - anticholinergic effects: dryness of the mouth, constipation, dilation of the pupils, blurred vision, urinary retention, tachycardia.
+ administer with caution to elderly patients and patients with closed-angle glaucoma, benign prostatic hyperplasia, urinary retention.
+ avoid or monitor combination with drugs known to have anticholinergic effects: tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline, clomipramine), h-1 antihistamines (chlorphenamine, promethazine), antiparkinsonians (biperiden), antispasmodics (atropine, hyoscine butylbromide), neuroleptics (chlorpromazine), etc. (increased risk of adverse effects).
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ volumes of nebuliser solution to be administered are insufficient to obtain efficient nebulisation in most nebulisers: add ipratropium to salbutamol and then 0.9% sodium chloride to obtain a total volume of 5 ml in the reservoir of the nebuliser. the diluted solution is dispersed with oxygen at a flow rate of 6 to 8 litres/minute. stop the nebulisation when the reservoir is empty, after around 10 to 15 minutes.
+ storage: below 25°c