# isosorbide dinitrate

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ vasodilator, antianginal

### indications
+ prophylaxis and treatment of acute angina
+ adjunctive therapy in left congestive heart failure

### presentation- 5 mg tablet

### dosage
+ short-term prophylaxis of acute angina (sublingually)
    adult: 5 to 10 mg taken 10 minutes before a precipitating event (exercise, stress, etc.)
+ long-term prophylaxis of angina and treatment of heart failure (orally)  
    adult: 30 to 120 mg/day in 2 to 3 divided doses  
    gradually increase the dose until effective. do not stop treatment abruptly.  
+ treatment of acute angina (sublingually)  
    adult: 5 to 10 mg, to be repeated after 10 minutes if necessary

### duration
+ according to clinical response

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with obstructive cardiomyopathy, hypotension, shock.
+ may cause: orthostatic hypotension (especially in elderly patients), headache, nausea, flushing of the face, haemolysis in patients with g6pd deficiency, severe hypotension with risk of circulatory collapse in the event of overdose.
+ use the lowest effective dose in patients taking another nitrate derivative, a vasodilator or an antihypertensive drug and in elderly patients.
+ combination with antihypertensive drugs, diuretics, vasodilators and alcohol enhances hypotensive effects.
+ do not combine with sildenafil (risk of acute coronary syndrome).
+ *pregnancy*: not recommended (safety is not established)
+ *breast-feeding*: not recommended (safety is not established)

### remarks
+ sublingual tablet must be crunched first, then slowly dissolved under the tongue. oral tablet must be swallowed whole.
+ by sublingual route, antianginal effect appears within less than 10 minutes and persists for 1 to 2 hours.
+ sustained-release formulations are used for the long-term management of angina and the treatment of congestive heart failure. the time interval between each administration depends on the preparations.
+ storage: below 25°c