# labetalol

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ non cardioselective beta-blocker

### indications
+ hypertension in pregnancy

### presentation
+ 100 mg and 200 mg tablets

### dosage
+ 200 mg/day in 2 divided doses. increase if necessary in 100 to 200 mg increments until an effective dose is reached, usually 400 to 800 mg/day (max. 2400 mg/day). if higher doses are required, give in 3 divided doses.

### duration
+ according to clinical response. do not stop treatment abruptly, decrease doses gradually.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with asthma, chronic obstructive bronchopneumonia, heart failure, severe hypotension, bradycardia < 50/minute, atrio-ventricular heart blocks, raynaud's syndrome, hepatic impairment.
+ may cause: bradycardia, hypotension, heart failure, bronchospasm, hypoglycaemia, gastrointestinal disturbances, dizziness, headache, weakness, urinary retention.
+ administer with caution to patients with diabetes (risk of hypoglycaemia).
+ reduce dosage in patients with renal impairment.
+ in the event of anaphylactic shock, risk of resistance to epinephrine.
+ avoid or monitor combination with: mefloquine, digoxin, amiodarone, diltiazem, verapamil (risk of bradycardia); tricyclic antidepressants, neuroleptics, other anti-hypertensive drugs (risk of hypotension).
+ do not administer simultaneously with antacids (aluminium or magnesium hydroxide, etc.). administer 2 hours apart.
+ monitor the newborn: risk of hypoglycaemia, bradycardia, respiratory distress occurring most often during the first 24 hours and until 72 hours after the birth.
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ storage: below 25°c