# lactulose

### therapeutic action
+ osmotic laxative

### indications
+ prevention of constipation in patients taking opioid analgesics (e.g. codeine, morphine)

### presentation
+ 10 g/15 ml oral solution

### dosage and duration
+ child under 1 year: 5 ml/day (1 tsp/day)
+ child from 1 to 6 years: 5 to 10 ml/day (1 to 2 tsp/day)
+ child from 7 to 14 years: 10 to 15 ml/day (2 tsp/day or 1 ssp/day)
+ child over 14 years and adult: 15 to 45 ml/day (1 to 3 ssp/day)  
    start lactulose when analgesic treatment continues more than 48 hours.  
lactulose must be taken daily, until the end of the opioid treatment. regular follow up  (frequency/consistency of stools) is essential in order to adjust dosage correctly.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis, intestinal obstruction, undiagnosed abdominal pain.
+ may cause: abdominal discomfort, flatulence and diarrhoea.
+ in the event of diarrhoea, exclude a faecal impaction and intestinal obstruction; reduce the dose.
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ it may take up to 48 hours, or even longer, before the treatment is effective. lactulose is not indicated in acute constipation where a rapid result is needed.
+ if necessary, lactulose may be given in combination with a stimulant laxative (e.g. bisacodyl, senna).
+ the oral solution may be taken undiluted, or diluted in water.
+ the treatment should be accompanied by dietary measures (fluids and fibre).
+ storage: below 25°c.
+ do not store in a refrigerator (cristallisation).