# levonorgestrel for emergency contraception

### therapeutic action
+ hormonal contraceptive, progestogen

### indications
+ prevention of pregnancy in the event of a lapse or absence of contraception

### presentation
+ 1.5 mg tablet

### dosage and duration
+ one 1.5 mg tablet as a single dose, whatever the day of the cycle, as soon as possible after unprotected intercourse and preferably within the first 72 hours as effectiveness decreases with time. it is however recommended to administer the treatment up to 120 hours (5 days) after unprotected intercourse.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ no contra-indication.
+ may cause: menstrual irregularities, vaginal bleeding, nausea, headache, dizziness.
+ re-administer treatment if vomiting occurs within 3 hours of taking treatment.
+ double the dose (3 mg as a single dose) in women taking prophylactic antiretroviral treatment or enzyme-inducing drugs (rifampicin, rifabutin, griseofulvin, phenytoin, phenobarbital, carbamazepine, certain antiretrovirals): contraceptive effectiveness may be reduced.
+ *pregnancy*: in the event of treatment failure (i.e. pregnancy develops) or if used during an undiagnosed pregnancy, there is no known harm for the foetus.
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ emergency contraception is intended to prevent pregnancy; it cannot terminate an ongoing pregnancy.
+ there is a risk of treatment failure. carry out a pregnancy test if there is no menstruation:
    - within 5 to 7 days after the expected date, if the date is known;
    - or within 21 days following treatment.
+ storage: below 25°c