# lopinavir/ritonavir = lpv/r

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ antiretrovirals, hiv-1 and hiv-2 protease inhibitors

### indications
+ hiv-1 or hiv-2 infection, in combination with other antiretroviral drugs

### presentation
+ 40 mg lopinavir/10 mg ritonavir tablet and capsule of oral pellets
+ 100 mg lopinavir/25 mg ritonavir film coated tablet
+ 200 mg lopinavir/50 mg ritonavir film coated tablet
+ 80 mg lopinavir/20 mg ritonavir per ml oral solution, containing 42% alcohol (v/v), with a graduated syringe for oral administration

### dosage
+ child from 14 days to 6 months: 32/8 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses
+ child over 6 months:
    - 7 to 15 kg: 24/6 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses
    - 15 to 40 kg: 20/5 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses
+ adult: 800/200 mg/day in 2 divided doses

| weight  | 80/20 mg/ml oral solution | 100/25 mg tablet | 200/50 mg tablet |
|---------|---------------------------|------------------|------------------|
| < 4 kg  | 1 ml x 2                  |                  |                  |
| 4  < 10 | 1.5 ml x 2                |                  |                  |
| 10 < 14 | 2 ml x 2                  |                  |                  |
| 14 < 20 | 2.5 ml x 2                |                  |                  |
| 20 < 26 | 3 ml x 2                  | 2 tab x 2        |                  |
| 26 < 35 | -                         | 3 tab x 2        |                  |
| ≥ 35    | -                         | 4 tab x 2        | 2 tab x 2        |

### duration
+ depending on the efficacy and tolerance of lpv/r.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with severe hepatic impairment.
+ do not administer oral solution to patients with renal or hepatic impairment.
+ may cause:
    - gastrointestinal disturbances (mainly diarrhoea), skin rash, pruritus;
    - hepatic disorders (raised transaminases), pancreatic disorders, metabolic disorders (lipodystrophy, hyperlipidaemia, diabetes mellitus with glucose intolerance and/or insulin resistance).
+ lpv/r reduces the efficacy of oral contraceptives: use a non-hormonal contraception or injectable medroxyprogesterone or an oral contraceptive containing 50 µg ethinylestradiol per tablet.
+ avoid combination with rifampicin. use rifabutin if possible.
+ administer with caution to patients with haemophilia (risk of haemorrhage) or renal or hepatic impairment.
+ *pregnancy*: oral solution is contra-indicated; no contra-indication for tablets and capsules.

### remarks
+ tablets may be taken with meals or on an empty stomach. the oral solution must be taken with meals.
+ the tablets must not be chewed or crushed.
+ capsules must be opened then oral pellets must be poured into a small amount of breast milk or soft foods and administered to the child immediately. pellets must not be stirred, crushed, dissolved/dispersed in food, or chewed.
+ storage: tablets: below 25°c; oral solution: between 2°c and 8°c.
+ if refrigeration is not available, oral solution kept below 25°c may be stored for 6 weeks maximum.