# mefloquine = mq

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision
+ for the treatment of malaria, use coformulated artesunate/mefloquine tablets.

### therapeutic action
+ antimalarial

### indications
+ treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria, in combination with artesunate
+ completion treatment following parenteral therapy for severe falciparum malaria, in combination with artesunate
+ prophylaxis of falciparum malaria for non-immune individuals

### presentation
+ 250 mg scored tablet

### dosage and duration
+ *treatment of falciparum malaria (in combination with artesunate administered on d1, d2, d3)*  
    child 3 months and over (≥ 5 kg) and adult: 25 mg base/kg as a single dose
+ *prophylaxis of falciparum malaria*  
    child 3 months and over (≥ 5 kg): 5 mg base/kg once a week
    adult: 250 mg base once a week
    travellers should start prophylaxis 2 to 3 weeks before departure and continue throughout the stay and for 4 weeks after return.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with neuropsychiatric disorders (or history of), seizures, hypersensitivity to mefloquine or quinine; mefloquine treatment in the previous 4 weeks.
+ for completion treatment following parenteral therapy for severe malaria: do not administer if the patient developed neurological signs during the acute phase.
+ for prophylaxis: do not administer to patients with severe hepatic impairment.
+ may cause:
    - gastrointestinal disturbances, dizziness, headache, sleeping disorders (effects usually transitory when used for prophylaxis);
    - more rarely: neuropsychiatric reactions, heart rhythm disorders, hypo or hypertension, skin allergies.
+ if the patient vomits less than 30 minutes after administration, repeat the full dose. if the patient vomits within 30 to 60 minutes, re-administer a half the dose.
+ do not combine with anti-epileptics (risk of seizures), coartemether, chloroquine, halofantrine (risk of seizures, cardiac toxicity).
+ do not administer simultaneously with quinine (risk of seizures, cardiac toxicity). if mefloquine is used after quinine iv, administer mefloquine 12 hours after the last dose of quinine.
+ administer with caution to patients taking antiarrhythmics, beta-blockers, calcium-channel blockers or digitalis (risk of heart rhythm disorders).
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication during the 2nd and 3rd trimester. safety in the first trimester has not been definitely established. however, given the risks associated with malaria, the combination artesunatemefloquine may be used during the first trimester if it is the only effective treatment available.
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ storage: below 25°c