# metronidazole

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ antiprotozoal, antibacterial (group of nitroimidazoles)

### indications- amoebiasis, giardiasis, trichomoniasis
+ bacterial vaginitis, infections due to anaerobic bacteria (e.g. clostridium sp, bacteroides sp, etc.)

### presentation
+ 250 mg and 500 mg tablets
+ 200 mg/5 ml oral suspension

### dosage and duration
+ *amoebiasis*  
    child: 45 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses  
    adult: 500 to 800 mg 3 times daily  
    the treatment lasts 5 days in intestinal amoebiasis and 5 to 10 days in hepatic amoebiasis.
+ *giardiasis*  
    child: 30 mg/kg once daily for 3 days  
    adult: 2 g once daily for 3 days
+ *trichomoniasis and bacterial vaginitis*  
    adult: 2 g as a single dose  
    in the event of trichomoniasis, also treat sexual partner.
+ *infections due to anaerobic bacteria*  
    child: 30 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses  
    adult: 500 mg 3 times daily  
    according to indication, metronidazole may be used in combination with other antibacterials; treatment duration depends on indication.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with hypersensitivity to metronidazole or another nitro imidazole (tinidazole, secnidazole, etc.).
+ may cause: gastrointestinal disturbances; rarely: allergic reactions, brownish urine, headache, dizziness. risk of antabuse reaction when combined with alcohol.
+ administer with caution in patients taking oral anticoagulants (risk of haemorrhage), lithium, phenytoin, ergometrine (increased plasma concentrations of these drugs).
+ reduce total daily dose to ⅓ and give once daily to patients with severe hepatic impairment.
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication; divide into smaller doses, avoid prolonged use.
+ *breast-feeding*: significantly excreted in milk (risk of gastrointestinal disturbances in breastfed infants); 
+ divide into smaller doses, avoid prolonged use.

### remarks
+ storage: below 25°c
+ for the oral suspension: follow manufacturer’s instructions.