# miconazole oral gel

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision
### therapeutic action

+ antifungal

### indications
+ benign oropharyngeal candidiasis

### presentation
+ 2% oral gel (24 mg/ml) together with, depending on the manufacturer:
    - a 2.5 ml measuring spoon with 1.25 ml and 2.5 ml graduation
or
    - a 5 ml measuring spoon with 2.5 ml and 5 ml graduation

### dosage
+ child from 6 months to 2 years: 1.25 ml 4 times/day
+ child over 2 years and adult: 2.5 ml 4 times/day
the oral gel should be kept in the mouth 2-3 minutes and then swallowed, or in young children, applied to the tongue and inside of each cheek.

### duration
+ 7 days; 14 days of treatment may be necessary.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions

+ do not administer:
    - to children under 6 months or patients with swallowing difficulties (risk of suffocation due to oral gel form);
    - in patients with hepatic impairment.
+ do not combine with antivitamin k agents (risk of haemorrhage), glibenclamide (increased hypoglycaemic effect), phenytoin (increased plasma concentration of phenytoin).
+ may cause: nausea, taste disturbances.
+ *pregnancy*: no contraindication
+ *breast-feeding*: no contraindication

### remarks
+ use the measuring spoon provided and check the graduation.
+ administer between meals (preferably after meals).
+ in patients with dentures, clean dentures with oral gel when removed.
+ in the event of moderate or severe oropharyngeal candidiasis, use oral fluconazole.
+ miconazole oral gel is not included in the who list of essential medicines.
+ storage: below 25°c