# misoprostol

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision
### therapeutic action

+ cervical ripening agent, oxytocic drug (prostaglandin analogue)

### indications
+ cervical dilation before aspiration or curettage
+ first trimester incomplete abortion
+ termination of intra-uterine pregnancy, preferably in combination with mifepristone
+ induction of labour when the cervix is not favourable, preferably in combination with mifepristone in the case of intrauterine foetal death
+ treatment of post-partum haemorrhage due to uterine atony, when injectable oxytocics are not available or ineffective

### presentation
+ 200 micrograms scored tablet

### dosage and duration
+ *cervical dilation before aspiration or curettage*  
    400 micrograms as a single dose sublingually or vaginally, 3 hours before the procedure
+ *first trimester incomplete abortion*  
    400 micrograms as a single dose sublingually or 600 micrograms as a single dose orally
+ *termination of pregnancy up to 12-14 weeks after the last menstrual period*  
    800 micrograms sublingually or vaginally then, if necessary, 400 micrograms every 3 hours, until expulsion starts (max. 5 doses in total or 2400 micrograms)
+ *induction of labour*  
    - intrauterine foetal death: 200 micrograms (2nd trimester) or 100 micrograms (3 rd trimester) or 50 micrograms (9th month) vaginally, every 6 hours until labour starts (max. 3 doses per 24 hours, to be repeated if necessary the following day)
    - viable *pregnancy*: 50 micrograms vaginally every 6 hours or 25 micrograms orally every 2 hours until labour starts (max. 150 micrograms)
+ *treatment of post-partum haemorrhage*  
    800 micrograms as a single dose sublingually

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ for induction of labour:
    - do not administer in the event of previous caesarean section and grand multiparity if the foetus is viable (risk of uterine rupture). if the foetus is dead or non-viable or viable but a caesarean section cannot be performed, reduce each dose by half and do not exceed 3 doses in total.
    - do not administer simultaneously with oxytocin. at least 6 hours must have elapsed since the last administration of misoprostol before oxytocin can be given.
    - regular monitoring of the intensity and frequency of contractions is mandatory after administration of misoprostol.
    - if the foetus is viable, continuous foetal heart monitoring is mandatory for 30 minutes after administration of each dose of misoprostol and once contractions are experienced or detected.
+ may cause: dose-dependent diarrhoea, vomiting, uterine hypertony, headache, fever, chills, foetal heart rhythm disorders, foetal distress.
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ to prepare an oral dose of 25 micrograms, dilute one 200 micrograms tablet into 200 ml of water. take 25 ml of the solution (1 microgram/ml). shake the bottle before use.
+ for termination of pregnancy and induction of labour after intrauterine foetal death, it is preferable to administer mifepristone first to improve the efficacy of misoprostol and reduce the number of dose required.
+ do not use misoprostol in ectopic or molar pregnancy.
+ storage: below 25° c