# morphine immediate-release (mir)

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ centrally acting opioid analgesic

### indications
+ severe pain

### presentation
+ 10 mg immediate-release tablet
+ 10 mg/5 ml oral solution, for pediatric use

### dosage
there is no standard dose. the optimal dose is that which provides efficient pain relief to the patient. it is adjusted in relation to the regular assessment of pain intensity and the incidence of adverse effects. 
+ day 1:
    - start with a scheduled treatment (scheduled doses):  
        child over 6 months: 1 mg/kg/day in 6 divided doses at 4-hour intervals  
        adult: 60 mg/day in 6 divided doses at 4-hour intervals
    - adjust the treatment if pain persists by administering “rescue” doses between the scheduled doses.  
        the rescue doses administered are the same as the scheduled doses.
+ then, adjust scheduled treatment every 24 hours according to the total dose given the day before (i.e. total scheduled doses + total rescue doses).  
    for example, day 1, for a dose of 60 mg/day, i.e. 10 mg every 4 hours:

4

10 mg

3

mild pain

2

10 mg

1

mild pain

0

5

6

7

10 mg

moderate pain

10 mg

mild pain

mild pain

mild pain

moderate pain
10 mg

example
rescue
doses

moderate pain

severe pain

example
simple
verbal scale

10 mg

10 mg

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23

mild pain

9

10 mg

scheduled
doses

8

10 mg

hours

in this example, the scheduled treatment on day 2 is 90 mg/day, i.e. 60 mg (total scheduled doses on
day 1) + 30 mg (total rescue doses on day 1) in 6 divided doses, i.e. 15 mg every 4 hours.
+ scheduled doses must be administered at regular time intervals and not on demand, even at night,
unless the patient is abnormally drowsy (in this event, delay the administration).
+ reduce the dose by half in elderly patients and patients with renal or hepatic impairment.

### duration
+ once the pain is controlled, change to sustained-release morphine.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ see sustained-release oral morphine (msr).

### remarks
+ administer an appropriate laxative (e.g. lactulose) if analgesic treatment continues more than 48 hours.
+ the morphine dose in tablets is not suitable for young children. use oral solution instead. if this is not available, use injectable morphine by the oral route: dilute an ampoule of 10 mg/ml (1 ml) with 9 ml of water to obtain a solution containing 1 mg/ml.
+ morphine is on the list of narcotics: follow national regulations.
+ storage: below 25°c