# nevirapine = nvp

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ antiretroviral, hiv-1 non nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor

### indications
+ hiv-1 infection, in combination with other antiretroviral drugs

### presentation
+ 50 mg dispersible tablet
+ 200 mg tablet
+ 50 mg/5 ml oral suspension

### dosage
+ child from 2 months to 8 years: 4 mg/kg once daily for 14 days, then 14 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses
from the 15th day
+ child over 8 years: 4 mg/kg once daily for 14 days, then 8 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses from the
15th day, without exceeding 400 mg/day
+ adult: 200 mg once daily for 14 days, then 400 mg/day in 2 divided doses from the 15th day
weight

5 to < 10 kg
10 to < 15 kg
15 to < 20 kg
20 to < 25 kg
25 to < 30 kg
30 to < 40 kg
40 to < 50 kg
≥ 50 kg

10 mg/ml oral suspension
initial
maintenance
3 ml
6 ml x 2
5 ml
10 ml x 2
7 ml
14 ml x 2
< 8 years: 16 ml x 2
10 ml
> 8 years: 10 ml x 2
< 8 years: 20 ml x 2
12 ml
> 8 years: 12 ml x 2
14 ml
14 ml x 2
-
-
-
-

initial

use oral
suspension

½ tab
½ tab
½ tab
1 tab
1 tab
1 tab

200 mg tablet
maintenance
-

½ tab x 2
1 tab am and ½ tab pm
< 8 years: 1 tab am and ½ tab pm
> 8 years: ½ tab x 2
< 8 years: 1 tab x 2

> 8 years: ½ tab x 2
1 tab am and ½ tab pm
1 tab x 2
1 tab x 2

### duration
+ the duration of treatment depends on the efficacy and tolerance of nevirapine.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with severe hepatic impairment, history of severe intolerance to
nevirapine that led to permanent discontinuation of treatment.
+ may cause:
    - cutaneous reactions sometimes severe (stevens-johnson and lyell syndromes), hepatic disorders possibly
severe (fulminant hepatitis). in these cases, stop taking nevirapine immediately and permanently;
    - gastrointestinal disturbances, headache, myalgia.
+ nevirapine reduces the efficacy of oral contraceptives: use a non-hormonal contraception or injectable
medroxyprogesterone or an oral contraceptive containing 50 µg ethinylestradiol per tablet.
+ avoid combination with rifampicin (decreases the efficacy of nevirapine). use rifabutin if possible. if
rifabutin is not available, use efavirenz rather than nevirapine.
+ monitor liver enzyme level (alat) during the first 2 months, then every 3 to 6 months. if the enzyme
level reaches 5 times the normal level, stop nevirapine immediately.
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ for prophylactic treatment to reduce mother-to-child transmission, check national recommendations.
+ to improve tolerance, respect the initial 14-day phase of treatment. in the event of restarting treatment
after having stopped for more than 7 days, recommence initial 14-day phase.
+ tablets are not scored. when half a tablet is required, use a cutter to cut the tablet into two equal parts.
+ also comes in fixed-dose combination tablets incorporating nevirapine-lamivudine-zidovudine.
+ storage: below 25°c
once opened, oral suspension keeps for 2 months maximum.