# nystatin

### therapeutic action
+ antifungal

### indications
+ mild oropharyngeal candidiasis

### presentation
+ 100 000 iu/ml oral suspension, bottle with calibrated dropper
also comes in 100 000 iu lozenges to be sucked.

### dosage and duration
+ child and adult: 400 000 iu/day in 4 divided doses (1 ml of the oral suspension or one lozenge to be  sucked, 4 times daily) for 7 days
+ the oral suspension should be retained in the mouth for a few minutes before swallowing, or, in young children, applied to the tongue and the inside of the cheeks.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ take between meals (e.g. at least 30 minutes before eating).
+ shake oral suspension well before using.
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ for the treatment of moderate to severe oropharyngeal candidiasis, use fluconazole.
+ nystatin also comes in 100 000 iu and 500 000 iu film coated tablets for the treatment of oesophageal candidiasis. these tablets are meant to be swallowed directly, without being sucked. they should not be used for the treatment of oropharyngeal candidiasis as this requires topical treatment.
+ for oesophageal candidiasis, oral fluconazole is recommended for first-line treatment. film coated nystatin tablets (400 000 iu/day in children and 2 000 000 iu/day in adults, in 4 divided doses for 2 to 3 weeks) should only be used when fluconazole is not available or contra-indicated.
+ storage: below 25°c
+ once the vial has been opened, the oral suspension keeps 7 days maximum.