# omeprazole

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ antiulcer drug (proton pump inhibitor)

### indications
+ gastro-oesophageal reflux
+ gastric and duodenal ulcers in adult

### presentation
+ 10 mg dispersible gastro-resistant tablet
+ 20 mg gastro-resistant capsule

### dosage
+ gastro-oesophageal reflux

child under 5 kg: 0.7 to 1.4 mg/kg/day (max. 2.8 mg/kg)
child 5 to 10 kg: 5 mg/day
child 10 to 20 kg: 10 mg/day
child over 20 kg and adult: 20 mg/day
omeprazole is taken once daily in the morning.
age

weight

1 mg/ml sol.*

10 mg tablet**

20 mg capsule

2 months to < 1 year

5 to < 10 kg

5 ml

-

-

< 2 months

1 to < 6 years

≥ 6 years and adult

< 5 kg

10 to < 20 kg
≥ 20 kg

3 ml
-
^-

-

1 tab
-

-
-

1 cap

* in a syringe, dissolve a ½ dispersible tablet (5 mg) in 5 ml of water to obtain a solution of 1 mg/ml.
** dissolve 1 dispersible tablet in half a glass.
+ gastric and duodenal ulcers
adult: 20 mg once daily in the morning

### duration
+ gastro-oesophageal reflux: 3 days (short-term relief of symptoms) or 4 to 8 weeks (long-term treatment); gastric and duodenal ulcers: 7 to 10 days

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not exceed 0.7 mg/kg/day (max. 20 mg/day) in patients with severe hepatic impairment.
+ may cause: headache, diarrhoea, constipation, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, dizziness, skin rash, fatigue.
+ monitor combination with:
    - atazanavir, itraconazole (decreased efficacy of these drugs);
    - diazepam, phenytoin, digoxin, raltegravir (increased toxicity of these drugs).
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ do not open capsules.
+ omeprazole is also used in combination with 2 antibacterial drugs for cure of helicobacter pylori infection.
+ storage: below 25°c
+ once dissolved, dispersible tablets should be administered within 30 minutes.