# oral rehydration salts = ors

### therapeutic action
+ prevention and treatment of dehydration from acute diarrhoea, cholera, etc.

### presentation
+ sachet of powder to be diluted in 1 litre of clean water.
+ who formulation:
grams/litre
sodium chloride
2.6
sodium
glucose
13.5
chloride
potassium chloride
1.5
glucose
trisodium citrate
2.9
potassium
citrate
total weight
20.5
total osmolarity

### dosage
mmol/litre
75
65
75
20
10
245

+ prevention of dehydration (who - treatment plan a)
child under 24 months: 50 to 100 ml after each loose stool (approximately 500 ml/day)
child from 2 to 10 years: 100 to 200 ml after each loose stool (approximately 1000 ml/day)
child over 10 years and adult: 200 to 400 ml after each loose stool (approximately 2000 ml/day)
+ treatment of moderate dehydration (who - treatment plan b)
child and adult:
over the first four hours:
age

under
4 months

4 to 11
months

12 to 23
months

2 to 4
years

5 to 14
years

weight

under 5 kg

5 to 7.9 kg

8 to 10.9 kg

11 to 15.9 kg 16 to 29.9 kg

ors in ml

200 to 400

-
-
-
-
400 to 600

600 to 800

800 to 1200

15 years
and over
30 kg
and over

1200 to 2200 2200 to 4000

after four hours:
if there are no signs of dehydration: follow treatment plan a.
if there are signs of moderate dehydration: repeat treatment plan b.
if there are signs of severe dehydration: start iv therapy (treatment plan c).
+ treatment of severe dehydration (who - treatment plan c)
in combination with iv therapy and only to a conscious patient:
child and adult: 5 ml/kg/hour
after 3 hours (6 hours in infants), reassess and choose the appropriate plan a, b or c.

### duration
+ as long as diarrhoea and signs of dehydration persist.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ if the eyelids become puffy during the treatment: stop ors, give plain water then, resume ors
according to treatment plan a when the puffiness is gone.
+ if case of vomiting, stop ors for 10 min and then resume at a slower rate (very small, frequent, amounts); do not stop rehydration.
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ a special ors-formula, resomal, is used under medical supervision, for severely malnourished children
only. however, in malnourished children with cholera, standard ors-formula is used instead of resomal.
+ storage: below 25°c
do not use the powder if it has turned into a yellow-brownish sticky substance.
once prepared, the solution must be used within 24 hours.