# paracetamol = acetaminophen

### therapeutic action
+ analgesic, antipyretic

### indications- mild pain
+ fever

### presentation
+ 100 mg and 500 mg tablets
+ 120 mg/5 ml oral suspension

### dosage
+ child: 60 mg/kg/day in 3 or 4 divided doses
+ adult: 3 to 4 g/day in 3 or 4 divided doses
age

< 1 month

1 to < 3 months

3 months to < 1 year

weight

120 mg/5 ml susp.

100 mg tablet

500 mg tablet

4 to < 6 kg

2.5 ml x 3

½ tab x 3

-

6 ml x 3

1½ tab x 3
3 tab x 3

< 4 kg

6 to < 10 kg

1.5 ml x 3
4 ml x 3

1 to < 3 years

10 to < 15 kg

5 to < 9 years

20 to < 30 kg

12 ml x 3

≥ 50 kg

-

3 to < 5 years
9 to < 14 years

≥ 14 years and adult

15 to < 20 kg
30 to < 50 kg

8 ml x 3
-

-

1 tab x 3
2 tab x 3
-
-

-
-
-
-
-

1 tab x 3
2 tab x 3

### duration
+ according to clinical response

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ administer with caution to patients with hepatic impairment.
+ do not exceed indicated doses, especially in children and elderly patients. paracetamol intoxications are severe (hepatic cytolysis).
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ for mild pain, paracetamol is used alone or in combination with an nsaid.
+ for moderate pain, paracetamol is used in combination with an nsaid and codeine or tramadol.
+ for severe pain, paracetamol is used in combination with an nsaid and morphine.
+ paracetamol is particularly recommended for patients allergic to aspirin, patients with a history of gastric problems and for pregnant and breast-feeding women and children.
+ paracetamol has no anti-inflammatory properties.
+ storage: below 25°c