# paroxetine

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ antidepressant, selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor (ssri)

### indications
+ major depression
+ severe post-traumatic stress disorders

### presentation
+ 20 mg scored tablet

### dosage
+ adult: 20 mg once daily in the evening

### duration
+ 6 months minimum. the treatment should be discontinued gradually (10 mg/day for one week then, 10 mg on alternate days for one week). if signs of relapse occur, increase the dose.

"contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions":
+ administer with caution and monitor use in patients with epilepsy, diabetes, history of gastrointestinal bleeding or bipolar disorders.
+ may cause:
    - allergic reactions (rare): stop treatment;
    - drowsiness (caution when driving/operating machinery), gastrointestinal disturbances (take during a meal), sexual dysfunction, headache, dizziness, blurred vision;
    - psychic disorders: exacerbation of anxiety, possibility of a suicide attempt at the beginning of therapy, manic episode during the course treatment;
    - withdrawal symptoms (dizziness, paresthesia, nightmares, etc.) very frequent if the treatment is discontinued abruptly.
+ do not combine with another antidepressant.
+ monitor combination with: phenytoin (toxicity increased), drugs which lower the seizure threshold (antispychotics, mefloquine, tramadol, etc.), lithium and other serotonergics.
+ avoid aspirin and nsaids (risk of bleeding) and alcohol during treatment.
+ *pregnancy*: re-evaluate whether the treatment is still necessary; if it is continued, observe the newborn infant if the mother was under treatment in the 3 rd trimester (risk of irritability, tremors, hypotony, sleeping disorders, etc.).
+ breast-feeding: no contraindication

### remarks
+ the antidepressant effect is not immediate. it is necessary to wait 3 weeks before assessing therapeutic efficacy. this must be explained to the patient.
+ in case of insufficient response after 4 weeks, dosage may be increased to 40 mg/day (do not exceed 20 mg/day in the event of hepatic or renal impairment).
+ in elderly patients, ssri are preferred to tricyclics (less contraindications, less adverse effects).
+ storage: below 25°c