# phenoxymethylpenicillin = penicillin v

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ penicillin antibacterial

### indications
+ streptococcal tonsillitis, scarlet fever
+ completion treatment following parenteral therapy with penicillin

### presentation
+ 250 mg tablet (400 000 iu)
+ powder for oral suspension, 125 mg/5 ml (200 000 iu/5 ml), to be reconstituted with filtered water

### dosage
+ child under one year: 250 mg/day in 2 divided doses
+ child 1 to 6 years: 500 mg/day in 2 divided doses
+ child 6 to 12 years: 1 g/day in 2 divided doses
+ child over 12 years and adult: 2 g/day in 2 divided doses

< 1 year

age

1 to < 6 years

6 to < 12 years

≥ 12 years and adult


weight

125 mg/5 ml oral susp.

250 mg tablet

10 to < 21 kg

2 tsp x 2

-

< 10 kg

21 to < 39 kg
≥ 39 kg

1 tsp x 2
4 tsp x 2
-

-

2 tab x 2
4 tab x 2

### duration
+ streptococcal tonsillitis, scarlet fever: 10 days

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with allergy to penicillin.
+ administer with caution to patients with allergy to cephalosporin (cross-sensitivity may occur) or severe renal impairment (reduce dose).
+ may cause: diarrhea, nausea; allergic reactions sometimes severe.
+ do not combine with methotrexate.
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ take between meals.
+ also comes in 250 mg/5 ml (400 000 iu/5 ml) oral solution.
+ storage: below 25°c
+ for the oral suspension (powder or reconstituted suspension): follow manufacturer’s instructions.