# prednisolone and prednisone

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (corticosteroid)

### indications
+ symptomatic treatment of allergic and inflammatory diseases or reactions, e.g.:
    - pneumocystis carinii (jiroveci) pneumonia with severe hypoxia
    - certain severe forms of extra-pulmonary tuberculosis
    - severe immune reconstitution syndrome, following initiation of antiretroviral or antituberculous treatment
    - leprous neuropathy (especially reversal reaction)
    - severe persistent asthma, in the event of treatment failure with high doses of inhaled corticoids
+ prevention of inflammatory reaction triggered by antiparasitic treatment (e.g. trichinellosis)

### presentation
+ 5 mg tablet

### dosage
the dose depends on indication, patient’s response and tolerance. if treatment lasts over 10 days, a high initial dose should be reduced as quickly as possible to the lowest effective maintenance dose.
+ child:
    - initial dose: 0.5 to 2 mg/kg/day
    - maintenance dose: 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg/day
+ adult:
    - initial dose: 20 to 70 mg/day
    - maintenance dose: 5 to 15 mg/day
+ administer preferably as a single daily dose, in the morning, with food.

### duration
+ according to indication and clinical response. if the treatment lasts more than 3 weeks: do not stop abruptly, reduce the daily dose gradually.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with active peptic ulcer (except if ulcer under treatment); infections not controlled by a specific treatment; acute viral infection (e.g. hepatitis, herpes simplex or zoster).
+ may cause (prolonged treatment with high doses): adrenal suppression, muscle atrophy, growth retardation, increased susceptibility to infections, hypokalaemia, sodium and water retention (oedema and hypertension), osteoporosis.
+ in the event of acute adrenal failure, use iv hydrocortisone.
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication; take tablets just after a feed and wait 4 hours before the next feed if possible.

### remarks
+ 5 mg of prednisolone has the same anti-inflammatory activity as 5 mg of prednisone, 0.75 mg of dexamethasone and 20 mg of hydrocortisone.
+ storage: below 25°c