# quinine

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ antimalarial

### indication
+ treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria
+ completion treatment following parenteral therapy with quinine for severe falciparum malaria

### presentation and route of adminisitration
+ 300 mg quinine sulfate tablet

### dosage and duration
+ dosage is expressed in terms of salt. with the exception of quinine bisulfate, the dosage is the same for all quinine salts (sulfate, hydrochloride, dihydrochloride):
child and adult < 50 kg: 30 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses at 8-hour intervals for 7 days
adult ≥ 50 kg: 1800 mg/day in 3 divided doses at 8-hour intervals for 7 days
age

weight

2 to < 8 years

12 to < 25 kg

¼ tab x 3
½ tab x 3

11 to < 14 years

35 to < 50 kg

1½ tab x 3

5 months to < 2 years
8 to < 11 years
≥ 14 years

7 to < 12 kg

25 to < 35 kg
≥ 50 kg

300 mg tablet
1 tab x 3
2 tab x 3

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ may cause: headache, skin rash; visual, auditory and gastrointestinal disturbances.
+ do not exceed indicated doses: risk of toxicity in the event of overdose.
+ if the patient vomits within one hour after administration, repeat the full dose.
+ do not combine with chloroquine, halofantrine and mefloquine.
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ 10 mg of quinine sulfate or hydrochloride or dihydrochloride = 8 mg of quinine base; 14 mg of quinine bisulfate = 8 mg of quinine base.
+ in pregnant women, quinine is administered in combination with clindamycin.
+ quinine should not be used for prophylaxis.
+ the 300 mg tablets are not suitable for use in children under 5 months.
+ storage: below 25°c