# resomal

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ oral rehydration salts with high potassium and low sodium contents

### indications
+ prevention and treatment of dehydration, in patients suffering from complicated acute malnutrition only

### presentation
+ sachet containing 84 g of powder, to be diluted in 2 litres of clean, boiled and cooled water
composition for one litre:
mmol/litre
mmol/litre
glucose
saccharose
sodium
potassium
chloride

55
73
45
40
70

citrate
magnesium
zinc
copper
osmolarity

7
3
0.3
0.045
294 meq/litre

### dosage and duration
+ *prevention of dehydration*  
    child under 2 years: 50 to 100 ml after each loose stool as long as diarrhoea persists
    child over 2 years: 100 to 200 ml after each loose stool as long as diarrhoea persists
    adult: 200 to 400 ml after each loose stool as long as diarrhoea persists
+ *treatment of dehydration*  
    child and adult: 5 ml/kg every 30 minutes over the first 2 hours, then 5 to 10 ml/kg/hour for the next 4 to 10 hours, until dehydration is corrected.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with cholera or uncomplicated acute malnutrition: use standard ors instead.
+ may cause: heart failure when administered too rapidly. during treatment, closely monitor the rate of administration in order to avoid overhydration. increase in respiratory and pulse rates and appearance or increase of oedema are signs of over rapid rehydration. in this event, stop resomal for one hour then reassess the patient’s condition.
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ storage: below 25°c
+ do not use the powder if it has turned sticky.
+ once prepared, the solution should be used within 24 hours.