# rifampicin = r

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ first line antituberculous antibacterial (sterilising and bactericidal activity)
+ antileprotic antibacterial (bactericidal activity)

### indications
+ tuberculosis, in combination with other antituberculous antibacterials
+ paucibacillary leprosy, in combination with dapsone
+ multibacillary leprosy, in combination with dapsone and clofazimine

### presentation
+ 150 mg and 300 mg tablets or capsules

### dosage
+ tuberculosis
    child under 30 kg: 15 mg/kg (10 to 20 mg/kg/day) once daily, on an empty stomach  
    child over 30 kg and adult: 10 mg/kg (8 to 12 mg/kg/day) once daily, on an empty stomach  
maximum dose: 600 mg/day
+ paucibacillary and multibacillary leprosy
    child under 10 years: 12 to 15 mg/kg once monthly, on an empty stomach  
    child from 10 to 14 years: 450 mg once monthly, on an empty stomach  
    adult: 600 mg once monthly, on an empty stomach

### duration
+ tuberculosis: according to protocol; paucibacillary leprosy: 6 months; multibacillary leprosy: 12 months

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with jaundice, hypersensitivity to rifamycins or history of severe haematological disorders (thrombocytopenia, purpura) during a previous treatment with rifamycins.
+ avoid or administer with caution to patients with hepatic impairment (do not exceed 8 mg/kg/day).
+ may cause:
    - orange-red discoloration of body secretions (urine, tears, saliva, sputum, sweat, etc.), normal, harmless;
    - gastrointestinal disturbances, headache, drowsiness, hepatic disorders;
    - influenza-like syndrome (more frequent when treatment is not taken regularly);
    - thrombocytopenia, hypersensitivity reactions.
+ if signs of hepatotoxicity (e.g. jaundice) develop, rifampicin should be discontinued until symptoms resolve.
+ in patients taking nevirapine, indinavir, nelfinavir, lopinavir/ritonavir, atazanavir/ritonavir, use rifabutin in place of rifampin.
+ rifampicin reduces the effect of many drugs (antimicrobials, some hormones, antidiabetics, corticoids, phenytoin, etc.):
    - in women, use a non-hormonal contraception or injectable medroxyprogesterone or, as a last resort, use an oral contraceptive containing 50 µg ethinylestradiol per tablet.
    - in the event of concomitant fluconazole administration, administer each drug 12 hours apart (rifampicin in the morning, fluconazole in the evening).
    - for the other drugs, adjust dosage if necessary.
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication. risk of maternal and neonatal bleeding disorders when the mother receives rifampicin in late pregnancy: administer phytomenadione (vitamin k) to the mother and the newborn to reduce the risk.
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ for patients on first-line antituberculous treatment, rifampicin is given as part of a fixed dose combination (isoniazid + rifampicin + pyrazinamide + ethambutol or isoniazid + rifampicin + pyrazinamide or isoniazid + rifampicin).
+ for the treatment of single skin lesion paucibacillary leprosy, rifampicin (600 mg) + ofloxacin (400 mg) + minocycline (100 mg) are administered as a single dose.
+ rifampicin is also used in combination with co-trimoxazole for the treatment of brucellosis in children < 8 years and pregnant/breastfeeding women.
+ storage: below 25°c