# risperidone

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ atypical antipsychotic

### indications
+ acute or chronic psychosis
+ acute moderate to severe manic episode

### presentation
+ 1 mg tablet

### dosage
+ acute or chronic psychosis
adult: 2 mg in 2 divided doses on day 1 then 4 mg/day in 2 divided doses as of day 2 the dose may be increased to 6 mg/day in 2 divided doses if needed.
+ acute moderate to severe manic episode adult: 2 mg once daily; increase if necessary in steps of 1 mg/day (max. 6 mg/day)
+ reduce the doses by half (initial and incremental doses) in elderly patients and in patients with hepatic or renal impairment (max. 4 mg/day).

### duration
+ acute psychosis: minimum 3 months; chronic psychosis: minimum one year. the treatment should be discontinued gradually (over 4 weeks). if signs of relapse occur, increase the dose.
+ manic episode: 3 to 6 weeks

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to elderly patients with dementia (e.g. alzheimer's disease).
+ administer with caution and monitor use in patients > 60 years and patients with parkinson's disease, cardiac, hepatic or renal impairment.
+ may cause: orthostatic hypotension, hyperprolactinaemia, sexual dysfunction, extrapyramidal syndrome, tachycardia, headache, nausea, agitation, anxiety, insomnia, drowsiness (inform patients that it may affect their capacity to drive/operate machinery); neuroleptic malignant syndrome (unexplained hyperthermia with neuromuscular disorders), rare but requiring immediate treatment discontinuation.
+ in the event of extrapyramidal symptoms, combine with biperiden.
+ avoid or monitor combination with: fluoxetine, carbamazepine, rifampicin, furosemide, antihypertensives, cns depressants (opioid analgesics, sedatives, h1 antihistamines, etc.).
+ avoid alcohol during treatment.
+ *pregnancy*: re-evaluate whether the treatment is still necessary; if it is continued, haloperidol or chlorpromazine are in principle preferred as they are better known. however, if it is difficult to change treatment at the beginning of pregnancy or if pregnancy is already in second trimester, risperidone can be maintained. observe the newborn infant the first few days (risk of hypertonia, tremors, sedation).
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ atypical antipsychotics such as risperidone are less likely to cause extra-pyramidal adverse effects than conventional antipsychotics.
+ risperidone is not included in the who list of essential medicines.
+ storage: below 25°c