# ritonavir = rtv

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ antiretroviral, hiv-1 and hiv-2 protease inhibitor

### indications
+ booster for protease inhibitors (atazanavir, darunavir, saquinavir, etc.) in hiv-1 or hiv-2 infection.
ritonavir should not be used alone.

### presentation
+ 50 mg and 100 mg tablets
+ 80 mg/ml oral solution, containing 43% alcohol (v/v)

### dosage
+ adult:
    - tablet: 100 mg once daily or 200 mg/day in 2 divided doses, depending on the protease inhibitor co-administered
    - oral solution: 1.25 ml once daily or 2.5 ml/day in 2 divided doses, depending on the protease inhibitor co-administered

### duration
+ depending on the efficacy and tolerance of ritonavir.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with severe hepatic impairment.
+ adverse effects associated with the use of ritonavir as a booster are dependent on the other protease inhibitor.
+ ritonavir reduces the efficacy of oral contraceptives: use a non-hormonal contraception or injectable medroxyprogesterone or an oral contraceptive containing 50 µg ethinylestradiol per tablet.
+ administer with caution to patients with diabetes or haemophilia and, for oral solution, to patients with hepatic disease or epilepsy.
+ *pregnancy*: contra-indicated for oral solution; no contra-indication for tablets.

### remarks
+ take with meals.
+ many fixed-dose combinations containing ritonavir are available.
+ storage: below 25°c
+ do not refrigerate or freeze the oral solution.