# salbutamol = albuterol nebuliser solution

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ short-acting bronchodilator

### indications
+ symptomatic treatment of severe acute bronchospasm, e.g. in severe asthma attack

### presentation and route of administration
+ solution for inhalation, in unit dose vial of 5 mg in 2.5 ml (2 mg/ml), to be administered via a nebuliser

### dosage and duration
+ child under 5 years or under 15 kg: 2.5 mg (1.25 ml)/nebulisation, to be repeated every 20 to 30 minutes if necessary
+ child over 5 years and adult: 2.5 to 5 mg (1.25 to 2.5 ml)/nebulisation, to be repeated every 20 to 30 minutes if necessary
+ the nebuliser should always be driven by oxygen.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ may cause: headache, tremor, tachycardia; hyperglycaemia and hypokalaemia (after large doses); worsening hypoxia if administered without oxygen.
+ never use nebuliser solution by the parenteral route.
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ nebulised salbutamol should be reserved for severe asthma attacks when inhalation of oxygen is also required. otherwise, salbutamol should be delivered via a metered-dose inhaler with a spacer: administration is easier and faster, the treatment is as effective, or even more effective, than with a nebuliser and causes fewer adverse effects.
+ volumes of nebuliser solution to be administered are insufficient to obtain efficient nebulisation in most nebulisers: dilute salbutamol solution with 0.9% nacl to obtain a total volume of 4 ml in the reservoir of the nebuliser. the diluted solution is dispersed with oxygen at a flow rate of 5 to 8 litres/min. stop the nebulisation when the reservoir is empty (± 10-15 minutes).
+ also comes in unit dose vials of 1.25 mg in 2.5 ml, 2.5 mg in 2.5 ml, and in vials of 50 mg in 10 ml.
+ storage: below 25°c