# spironolactone

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ potassium-sparing diuretic, antagonist of aldosterone

### indications
+ oedema associated with congestive heart failure, hepatic cirrhosis and nephrotic syndrome

### presentation
+ 25 mg tablet

### dosage
+ oedema in congestive heart failure
    adult: 100 mg/day (up to 200 mg/day in severe cases) then, when oedema is controlled, maintenance dose of 25 mg/day
+ ascites in hepatic cirrhosis
    adult: 100 to 400 mg/day.  
    when weight is stable, administer the lowest possible maintenance dose, in order to prevent adverse effects.
+ oedema in nephrotic syndrome
    adult: 100 to 200 mg/day  
    the daily dose can be administered in 2 to 3 divided doses or once daily.

### duration
+ according to clinical response; avoid prolonged use.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with severe renal impairment, anuria, hyperkalaemia > 5 mmol/l, hyponatraemia.
+ do not combine with potassium salts, potassium-sparing diuretics; lithium (risk of lithium toxicity).
+ avoid or closely monitor combination with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (risk of severe, potentially fatal hyperkalaemia), digoxin (risk of digoxin toxicity) and reduce dosages.
+ may cause:
    - hyperkalaemia (especially in elderly or diabetics patients, patients with renal impairment or patients taking nsaids), hyponatraemia; metabolic acidosis (in patients with decompensated cirrhosis);
    - gynecomastia, metrorrhagia, impotence, amenorrhoea, gastrointestinal disturbances, headache, skin rash, drowsiness.
+ administer with caution in patients with hepatic or renal impairment or diabetes.
+ monitor regularly plasma-potassium levels.
+ *pregnancy*: avoid, use only if clearly needed (risk of feminisation of foetus); spironolactone is not indicated in the treatment of pregnancy-related oedema.
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ in children with oedema, the daily dose is 1 to 3 mg/kg/day.
+ spironolactone is also used for the diagnosis and treatment of primary hyperaldosteronism.
+ storage: below 25°c