# sulfadiazine

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ sulfonamide antibacterial

### indications
+ treatment and secondary prophylaxis of toxoplasmosis in immunodeficient patients, in combination with pyrimethamine

### presentation
+ 500 mg tablet

### dosage and duration
+ treatment of toxoplasmosis  
    adult: 4 to 6 g/day in 2 to 3 divided doses for 6 weeks minimum
+ secondary prophylaxis of toxoplasmosis  
    adult: 2 to 3 g/day in 2 divided doses, as long as necessary

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to sulfonamide-allergic patients; patients with severe renal or hepatic impairment.
+ may cause:
    - gastrointestinal disturbances, renal disorders (crystalluria, etc.), photosensitivity, megaloblastic anaemia due to folinic acid deficiency; haemolytic anaemia in patients with g6pd deficiency;
    - allergic reactions (fever, rash, etc.) sometimes severe (lyell's and stevens-johnson syndromes, haematological disorders, etc.). in these cases, stop treatment immediately.
+ adverse effects occur more frequently in patients with hiv infection.
+ monitor blood count if possible.
+ reduce the dose by half in patients with renal impairment.
+ do not combine with methotrexate and phenytoin.
+ administer calcium folinate systematically to prevent folinic acid deficiency.
+ drink a lot of liquid during treatment.
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication. however, avoid using during the last month of pregnancy (risk of jaundice and haemolytic anaemia in the newborn infant).
+ *breast-feeding*: avoid if premature infant, jaundice, low-birth weight, infant under one month of age. if sulfadiazine is used, observe the infant for signs of jaundice.

### remarks
+ storage: below 25°c