# valproic acid = sodium valproate

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision
+ valproic acid should not be used during pregnancy and in women of childbearing age. the risk of foetal malformations is higher than with other antiepileptics.

### therapeutic action
+ antiepileptic

### indications
+ generalised and partial epilepsy

### presentation
+ 200 mg and 500 mg enteric coated tablets

### dosage
+ child under 20 kg: 20 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses
+ child over 20 kg: start with 400 mg (irrespective of weight) in 2 divided doses, then increase gradually until the individual optimal dose is reached, usually 20 to 30 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses
+ adult: start with 600 mg/day in 2 divided doses, then increase by 200 mg every 3 days until the individual optimal dose s reached, usually 1 to 2 g/day in 2 divided doses

### duration
+ lifetime treatment

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer:
    - to women of childbearing age. if the treatment is absolutely necessary and if there is no alternative, an effective contraception is required (intrauterine device);
    - to patients with pancreatitis, hepatic disease or history of hepatic disease.
+ may cause:
    - increase in the frequency of seizures at the beginning of therapy, drowsiness, weight gain, amenorrhoea, astrointestinal disturbances, extrapyramidal symptoms, behavioural disturbances, confusion, thrombocytopenia;
    - rarely: pancreatitis, hepatic disorders, severe allergic reactions (lyell’s and stevens-johnson syndromes), prolongation of bleeding time. in these cases, stop treatment.
+ monitor, if possible, liver transaminases and prothrombin time during first 3-6 months of therapy (risk of hepatitis).
+ reduce dosage in patients with renal impairment.
+ do not combine with mefloquine (increased risk of seizures).
+ monitor combination with: tricyclic antidepressants, other antiepileptics.
+ if other antiepileptics have been prescribed, increase the dose of valproic acid gradually over 2 weeks and reduce the dose of other antiepileptics.
+ *pregnancy*: do not start treatment during pregnancy (risk of neural tube defects; urogenital, limb and face malformations; psychomotor developmental disorders). if treatment was started before *pregnancy*: replace valporic acid with a safer antiepileptic if possible. if there is no other alternative, do not stop valporic acid however administer the minimal effective dose and divide the daily dose. monitor the newborn (risk of withdrawal syndrome and haemorrhagic disease, not related to vitamin k deficiency). the administration of folic acid during the first trimester may reduce the risk of neural tube defects.
+ *breast-feeding*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ take with meals.
+ also comes in 100 mg crushable tablets and 200 mg/5 ml oral solution.
+ storage: below 25°c