# zidovudine/lamivudine/nevirapine = azt/3tc/nvp

### notes
+ prescription under medical supervision

### therapeutic action
+ combination of 3 antiretrovirals

### indications
+ hiv-1 infection

### presentation
+ 60 mg azt/30 mg 3tc/50 mg nvp tablet
+ 300 mg azt/150 mg 3tc/200 mg nvp tablet

### dosage
+ child less than 25 kg: see table below

|   weight   | 60 mg azt/30 mg 3tc/50 mg nvp tablet |
|------------|--------------------------------------|
| 3 to 5 kg  | 1 tab x 2|




6 to 9 kg

1½ tab x 2

14 to 19 kg

2½ tab x 2

10 to 13 kg
20 to 24 kg

2 tab x 2
3 tab x 2

+ child ≥ 25 kg and adult: one 300 mg azt/150 mg 3tc/200 mg nvp tablet twice daily

### duration
+ depending on the efficacy and tolerance of treatment.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ do not administer to patients with severe haematological disorders (neutropenia, anaemia), hepatic disorders or intolerance to nevirapine that led to discontinuation of treatment.
+ may cause:
    - adverse effects common to all 3 antiretrovirals: gastrointestinal disturbances;
    - adverse effects of zidovudine: see zidovudine;
    - adverse effects of lamivudine: see lamivudine;
    - adverse effects of nevirapine: see nevirapine.
+ monitor if possible liver enzyme level (alat) during the first 2 months, then every 6 months. if the enzyme level reaches 5 times the normal level, stop nevirapine immediately.
+ nevirapine reduces the efficacy of oral contraceptives: use a non-hormonal contraception or injectable medroxyprogesterone or an oral contraceptive containing 50 µg ethinylestradiol per tablet.
+ do not combine with rifampicin.
+ *pregnancy*: no contra-indication

### remarks
+ to improve tolerance of nvp, administer half doses for the first 14 days of treatment. therefore, start triple therapy by using azt/3tc co-formulations and nevirapine tablets. after the initial 14-day phase of treatment, use the co-formulation azt/3tc/nvp.
+ storage: below 25°c