# zinc sulfate

### therapeutic action
+ micronutrient

### indications
+ zinc supplementation in combination with oral rehydration therapy in the event of acute and/or persistent diarrhoea in children under 5 years

### presentation
+ 20 mg scored and dispersible tablet, packed in a blister
+ 20 mg/5 ml syrup

### dosage and duration
+ child under 6 months: 10 mg once daily (½ tablet or ½ teaspoon once daily) for 10 days
+ child from 6 months to 5 years: 20 mg once daily (1 tablet or 1 teaspoon once daily) for 10 days place the half-tablet or full tablet in a teaspoon, add a bit of water to dissolve it, and give the entire spoonful to the child.

### contra-indications, adverse effects, precautions
+ no contra-indication.
+ if the child vomits within 30 minutes after swallowing the tablet, re-administer the dose.
+ do not give simultaneously with ferrous salts, administer at least 2 hours apart.

### remarks
+ zinc sulfate is given in combination with oral rehydration solution in order to reduce the duration and severity of diarrhoea, as well as to prevent further occurrences in the 2 to 3 months after treatment. zinc sulfate must never replace oral rehydration therapy which is essential (nor can it replace antibiotic therapy that may, in specific cases, be necessary).
+ zinc supplementation is not recommended in the event of diarrhoea in malnourished children taking therapeutic food (bp100®, plumpy' nut®, milk f75® or f100®, etc.) as these foods already contain the required amount of zinc.
+ storage: below 25°c
+ tablets are packed in a blister. leave tablets in blister until use. once a tablet is removed from the blister, it must be dissolved and administered immediately.